Hutterian Chronicles II
Excerpts and Summary of our Church Chronicle
How God gathered a united flock from among all the peoples of the
German lands and has now reestablished his work in this last age of the
world. Further, of the severe persecution, suffering, and heavy cross borne
by the church: great numbers were executed; about some a particular
account is given of the trials they were subjected to and of their valor. All
this, as well as other matters that happened in the church, has been
recounted briefly so that the Lord’s wonderful work may be remembered
and taken to heart.
In addition, the origin of our brotherhood, especially how God led our
forefathers out of the gross error, blindness, and darkness of the Roman
Catholic faith and brought them to the recognition of divine truth; also
how the church was gathered and built up, how the enemy of divine truth
tried every means to prevent it, stirring up fierce persecution against the
faithful, and how God delivered his people from the hostile power and by
his wonderful leading brought them out of the country and over the
Transylvanian Alps near Kronstadt into Walachia.
Further, how the brotherhood suffered during the Turkish War in
Walachia but through God's will and providence traveled on through
Moldavia and the Kingdom of Poland to the Ukraine. These and other
important church matters are described as simply and accurately as
possible for the benefit of those coming after us.
***************

Names of Elders

JAKOB HUTTER from Tirol 1536
HANS AMON from Bavaria 1536-1542
LEONHARD LANZENSTIEL from Bavaria 1542-1565
PETER RIDEMANN from Silesia 1542-1556
PETER WALPOT from Tirol 1565-1578
HANS KRÄL from Kitzbuhel 1578-1583
KLAUS BRAIDL from Hesse 1583-1611
SEBASTIAN DIETRICH from Württemberg 1611-1619
ULRICH JAUSSLING from Switzerland 1619-1621
VALENTIN WINTER from Württemberg 1622-1631
HEINRICH HARTMANN 1631-1639
ANDREAS EHRENPREIS 1639-1662
JOHANNES RÜCKER 1662-1687
JOHANNES MILDER 1687-1688
CASPAR EGLAUCH 1688-1693
*TOBIAS BERSCH 1694-1701
JONAS ROTH
MATHIAS HELM 1701-1724
**JAKOB POLLMAN 1724-1734
JÖRGL FRANCKH 1734-1746

***ZACHARIAS WALTER 1746-1761
****HEINRICH MÜLLER
HANSEL KLEINSASSER from Carinthia 1762-1779
JOSEPH KUHR from Alwinz 1779-1794
JOHANNES WALDNER from Carinthia 1794-1824
JAKOB WALTER from Sabatisch 1824-1855
JÖRG WALDNER 1846-1857
MICHEL WALDNER 1876-1889

In the original of Das Klein-Geschichtsbuch the list stops after
Heinrich Müller. For the sake of a complete record Zieglschmid added
names of the following brothers, in whose time the dying Hutterian
Church was renewed through the forced immigration of the Carinthians to
Transylvania.
***************

Preface to the Reader
More than thirty years have passed since our parents and
grandparents recognized the divine truth and began to live in Christian
community. During that time many memorable events have taken place
among the little flock and many signs of God's wonderful intervention.
His care, protection, and saving help were often clearly shown us, and
it is important that the memory of these happenings is not lost but
preserved for our descendants.

Up to now no one has undertaken this task and made a record,
although many have had a burning desire for a full and thorough account
of all that took place.
I must acknowledge I have often felt a great eagerness to do this
work, but my own unsuitability has deterred me. I have always hoped that
God would one day raise up a dedicated brother and grant him the zeal and
courage, the gifts and skill to begin and carry through this much-needed
work, to the praise and glory of his name.
Time is passing, however, and God by his divine will takes one after
another to himself.
Not many are still living who have a thorough grasp of it all, while
the young people grow up knowing only the stories they have heard here or
there.
Therefore, I see it as my duty and feel urged to devote my limited
gifts to this work, trusting in the help and grace of God.
I feel all the more drawn to write this history because dear brother
Joseph Kuhr several times asked me to undertake it, so that I might
complete it before his death. His advanced age prevented him from writing
it himself, for he was already seventy-eight years old.
I therefore cannot avoid the task any longer but have resolved to
fulfill his request in order to satisfy - the longing he and I share with many
devout people. May the almighty God give me strength, understanding,
and wisdom to carry out this task to his eternal praise. Amen!
Johannes Waldner
a servant of Jesus Christ and his church. 1794.
***************

Explanatory Note
Before I describe how our community started, I feel it necessary to
give a summary of the history recorded in the old chronicle so that the last
stages of the brotherhood once living in Moravia, Hungary, and
Transylvania can be seen in relationship to the beginning of our church
community. If, by any chance, the old chronicle should be lost, this will
provide a summarized version, going back to the beginning, and our
children and all who come after us may learn where their roots lie and who
their forefathers were. Then they can know that our religion, teaching, and
faith does not come from some new sect or error but is the one and only
truth, sealed and affirmed with the blood of men and women valiant in
faith, dauntless witnesses to the divine truth. These shed their blood for
the sake of the faith we still hold today.
We claim the same faith as our forefathers and acknowledge it as the
divine truth and the way to eternal life, the faith firmly founded on the
Holy Scriptures. Then do not let us forget our forefathers. Let us think of
them and follow their faith, for they have taught us the Word of God and
left us a great treasure, their writings and songs and the glorious example
of their steadfastness in all suffering and distress. May the Lord grant us
his grace to follow their example! Amen.
***************

Introduction
The one eternal, almighty God in his power and glory was alone and
unknown before the foundation and creation of the world. Then it pleased
him to create heaven and earth and fill them with his glory. He provided
earth with many kinds of fruit, plants, and living creatures; he set the
firmament with beautiful lights and numberless hosts of stars; he filled the
sea and streams with fish, different animals, and rare, wonderful creatures,
as the books of the Holy Scriptures tell us in many places. But these
creatures could not sufficiently acknowledge God's might, glory, and

wisdom. Although all his works praised him as fully as they were able,
they fell far short of the honor that is his due. Therefore, he created man
for the far greater glory of seeing and acknowledging his marvelous works
and power. He endowed men with understanding, discernment, and
wisdom, and even made them in his own divine image, expecting that they
would render fitting honor and praise to their God.
This means that the one, almighty God is no longer hidden and
unknown, for he shows himself through the work of his hands, as Paul
testifies in Romans 1. Ever since the world began, God's eternal power and
deity have been visible and recognizable in the works of his creation, just
as a craftsman's capacity and skill can be recognized through his work.
Paul says in the same passage that although men recognized that there
is a God, they have not praised and thanked him as God, and therefore all
their thinking has ended in futility. The first man and woman very soon
fell far away from God, and since then men have plunged deeper and
deeper into evil, becoming shamefully forgetful of their creator and
completely forsaking their likeness to God. For this reason God has given
them up to the vileness of their own desires. Paul tells us in Acts 14 that in
past ages God allowed all nations to go their own way.
But God the Lord did not leave himself without witnesses. He always
had a people on earth who acknowledged his name and among whom he
revealed himself through wonders, signs, and stern judgment. In the Old
Testament, God chose and called a people for himself from the seed of
Abraham and through this people gave compelling proof, especially in
Egypt, that he was God of Israel, Lord of the whole earth. Over five
hundred years later, the Philistines, a heathen nation, still spoke of his
miracles and might. They said to one another, We are lost! No such thing
has ever happened before. We are utterly lost! Who can deliver us from the
power of these mighty gods? These are the gods who smote Egypt with
every kind of plague.
God performed great and wonderful deeds for the Israelites and
showed he was with them again and again. At the time of David and
Solomon he raised their kingdom to a great height of power and splendor.
The Lord chose Jerusalem as his own among all the tribes of Israel. He let

a temple be built there as his dwelling place in perpetual memory of his
holy name. He filled and sanctified it with his holy presence and promised
to hear all prayers made within it. The fame of the Lord's name and of
Solomon's wisdom spread to the ends of the earth. All the world wanted to
hear Solomon's wisdom.
This people, city, and temple were a symbol of the people of the New
Testament, the church of the living God which was established through the
Lord Jesus Christ and through the power of God's Holy Spirit as it came
visibly upon the gathered believers in Jerusalem at Pentecost. They were
all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in new tongues, telling in
every language under heaven of the great things God had done.
In this gathered church the Lord once more showed himself in his
glory and divinely fulfilled all that he promised through the words of his
holy prophets. Although Jews and Gentiles resisted with might and main
and all the gates of hell were opened in opposition, it was impossible to
hinder his work.
The word of God spread far and wide, and the number of believers
grew.
Those who joyfully accepted his word asked for baptism, and three
thousand souls were added to the church in one day.
They met constantly to hear the apostles teach and to share the
common life, to break bread, and to pray. A sense of awe was in every
soul, and many marvels and signs were done through the apostles. Those
who were now believers came together and had everything in common.
They sold their property and possessions and distributed them to all, as the
need of each required. All were of one mind, daily attending the temple
together, breaking bread together in their homes and sharing their meals
with heartfelt joy as they praised God; and the people looked on them with
favor. Day by day the Lord added to their number those whom he was
saving.
This church was given to the world as a light from God, so that his
true likeness, lost by Adam, would shine out purely and clearly. As Peter

said, it was the holy nation, God's own people, who declare the power and
wonderful deeds of him who called them out of darkness into his light.
The church had about thirty-eight years of peace in Jerusalem. Then
at God's command the believers moved from the city two years before
Vespasian and Titus destroyed it. But the Lord had established his people
and church not only in Jerusalem. The apostles' preaching had carried
God's word to the whole world, and many people from all countries were
converted to the Christian faith.
The Lord Jesus Christ and the apostles Peter, John, and Paul had
already foretold, however, that false teachings and gross error would take
hold of Christendom and many false prophets would arise. Yes, the
antichrist would come and proclaim himself God.
All these prophecies were fulfilled. Shortly after the death of the
apostles and disciples, a serious decay in Christian beliefs became evident,
many wrong practices were introduced, and Christianity went further and
further astray.
In his song, known as the Forefathers' Song (Väterlied), dear brother
Georg Bruckmaier tells how divine truth was gradually eroded and
obscured: (LdHBr, 768-785)

What the apostles taught
Was left and set aside;
Silence surrounded it
For many centuries
And any who felt urged
To seek goodness and truth
Were erased from the earth,

Endured the cross and death.

Hansel Raiffer says in a song about community:
(LdHBr, 593-597)
Community was laid waste
After the apostles' time,
Distorted and suppressed
By Satan's envious spite.
But in abundant grace
The Lord has once more raised
A church community,
Following the apostles' teaching
Both in its words and deeds.

Georg Bruckmaier continues the same testimony:
LdHBr, 774
The Lord to his name's honor
Restored community
And Christian baptism
As Christ himself had taught.

He looked around for men ...
Sincere men of true learning,
Who knew the Scriptures well
Testified at this time
And witnessed with their blood.

These words are to be understood as referring to those who first
started community and indicate the glorious work that God began through
Jakob Hutter about the year 1530 in Moravia.
The way in which God acted, the extent to which he made the light of
his grace shine out abroad, the happenings at the very beginning, and the
amount of blood they cost are all wonderfully described by our dear
brother Kaspar Braitmichel. I draw on the earlier chronicle of the
Hutterian Brethren for the following account.
Kaspar Braitmichel first of all turned to the old chronicles and
historians of long ago to compile a short record. This told in particular of
the martyrdom of the twelve apostles and other faithful witnesses, the ten
severe persecutions launched by the Roman emperors against the
Christians, and the condition of Christendom when the persecutions ceased
and the church enjoyed outward peace and security under Constantine the
Great after he was baptized. Then came the abomination of desolation that
increased more and more as the papacy introduced one false, idolatrous
practice after another with continual suppression and execution of the
witnesses to divine truth, until the light of truth was obscured. The whole
of Christendom was plunged into darkness and blindness and the church
changed into the Babylonian whore.
After his summary of this corrupt and distressing time, he started to
describe the true awakening, beginning with the story of Luther and
Zwingli, which now follows.

***************

Beginning of our Church History
God has loved the Human race from the very beginning and did not
create it for destruction. In order to forestall the damage caused by the
devil's deceit, God in his mercy began gradually to fan the fire of divine
truth and with great wisdom brought light out of darkness. His purpose
was to show many people the way of truth that leads to eternal life if they
turn to God and leave their sinful and corrupt ways.
Pope Leo X [1513-1521] played no small part in provoking this
confrontation. He gained secret information about the emperor and all the
kings and princes through their confessors. Then he sent his delegates and
peddlers throughout Germany, with his full authority to sell the grace of
God and forgiveness of sins for money, confirming this in letters of
indulgence authenticated with his own seal. This was against the teaching
of Christ, as is also shown by the story of the apostle (Matthew 10:8; Acts
8:18-23) Peter when he refused to accept money from Simon the Sorcerer.
The pope's practices brought the corruption of the Roman court to a
climax. Doctor Martin Luther, an Augustinian monk, brought it all to light
and made it obvious to everyone.
In 1517, the thirty-second year of the rule of the emperor Maximilian
I, Martin Luther began teaching and writing at Wittenberg in Saxony,
warning people to be on their guard against such peddling and other
Babylonian trickery. The pope summoned him to Rome, but instead he
presented his views in writing to the legate of the pope at the Imperial Diet
in Augsburg. When he did not receive an answer, he returned home on the
advice of his well-wishers.
Then Ulrich Zwingli in Switzerland set out to storm the papacy.
About the time that the emperor Maximilian died, on January 12, 1519,
and Charles V was elected emperor, Zwingli began to teach and write
against the loathsome evil of Babylon, the shameless harlot.

These two, Luther and Zwingli, exposed all the deception and villainy
of the pope, bringing it to the light of day as if they would strike
everything to the ground with thunderbolts. But they put nothing better in
its place. They began to cling to worldly power and put their trust in
human help, and were soon just as bad - like someone mending an old
kettle and only making a bigger hole. They left behind a shameless people,
whom they had taught to sin.
To speak in a parable, they struck the jug from the pope's hand but
kept the broken pieces in their own.
And so it had to be as Jesus said, A man that is not faithful in small
things will not be trusted with great, but what he thought he had will be
taken from him. Now the two named above rapidly won a large following
of people who accepted their teaching as the truth. (Luke 16:10) Some
gave their lives for it, believing that they had found salvation in Christ.
This can be seen in the two young monks, Johannes and Heinrich, who
were burned at Brussels in the Netherlands in 1523.
It was the same with Kaspar Tauber, a rich citizen of Vienna, Austria,
who because of his faith was condemned and burned by his fellow citizens
in 1524. There were others besides, of whom nothing further is known, and
we count them blessed according to Christ's teaching in James 5:11, for
they suffered and fought a good fight. But however wonderful the
beginning, Luther and Zwingli and their followers were soon divided into
two wicked camps because of the sacraments, and they showed all the
signs of a new Babel. There was no change in their lives, only boasting and
the kind of knowledge that made them despise others. Eating meat, taking
wives, and reviling popes, monks, and priests (who of course richly
deserved it) was the extent of their service to God.
Martin Luther and his followers taught that the body of the Lord
Christ is in the bread of the Lord's Supper and his blood in the wine, and
that these bring forgiveness of sins.
Zwingli and his followers taught that the Lord's Supper was a
memorial of the salvation and grace of Christ. It was not a sacrifice for
sin, because that had been offered by Christ on the cross. Both of them

baptized infants and rejected the true baptism of Christ, which is sure to
bring the cross with it. They followed the pope in the practice of infant
baptism, taking over from him the leaven that gives rise to all kinds of
evil, the very gateway to false Christianity. While reviling him over other
points, they ignored the fact that he had just as little scriptural foundation
for infant baptism as for purgatory, the mass, the worship of saints, letters
of indulgence, and the like.
Luther and Zwingli defended their teaching with the sword and
wanted to force people to their beliefs, although faith is a gift of God and
is not subject to human control. Originally Zwingli had written and taught
that there is not one clear word in the Scriptures to justify infant baptism.
***************

1519 Beginning of the Church in Switzerland, Germany, and
Moravia
Because God wanted one united people, separated from all other
peoples, he brought forth the Morning Star, the light of his truth, to shine
with all its radiance in the present age of this world. He wanted in
particular to visit the German lands with his Word and to reveal the
foundation of divine truth, so that his holy work could be recognized by
everyone. It began in Switzerland, where God brought about an awakening.
First of all, a meeting took place among Ulrich Zwingli, Conrad Grebel (a
member of the nobility), and Felix Mantz. All three were men of learning
with knowledge of German, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. They started to
discuss matters of faith and realized that infant baptism is unnecessary
and, moreover, is not baptism at all.
Two of them, Conrad and Felix, recognized from the Lord and
believed that people should be truly baptized in the Christian order
appointed by God, because Christ himself says, Whoever believes and is
baptized will be saved. (Mark 16:16)

Ulrich Zwingli (who shrank from the cross, disgrace, and persecution
that Christ suffered) refused to agree - he said it would cause an uproar.
But Conrad and Felix said this was no reason to disobey the clear
command of God.
At this point a man came from Chur, a priest named Georg from the
house of Jakob, later known as Georg Blaurock. During a discussion on
questions of faith, Georg shared his own views. Someone in the meeting
asked who had just spoken. It was the man in the blue coat (blauer Rock)
So he was given this name because he had worn a blue coat.
This same Georg had come because of his extraordinary zeal.
Everyone thought of him as a plain, simple priest; but he was moved by
God's grace to holy zeal in matters of faith and he worked courageously
for the truth.
He, too, had first approached Zwingli and discussed questions of faith
with him, but he had gotten nowhere. Then he was told there were other
men even more on fire than Zwingli. He inquired eagerly about them and
met with them (that is, with Conrad Grebel and Felix Mantz) to talk over
questions of faith. They came to unity on these questions. In the fear of
God they agreed that from God's Word one must first learn true faith,
expressed in deeds of love, and on confession of this faith, receive true
Christian baptism as a covenant of a good conscience with God, serving
him from then on with a holy Christian life and remaining steadfast to the
end, even in times of tribulation.
One day when they were meeting, fear came over them and struck
their hearts. They fell on their knees before the almighty God in heaven
and called upon him who knows all hearts. They prayed that God grant it
to them to do his divine will and that he might have mercy on them.
Neither flesh and blood nor human wisdom compelled them. They were
well aware of what they would have to suffer for this.
After the prayer, Georg Blaurock stood up and asked Conrad Grebel
in the name of God to baptize him with true Christian baptism on his faith
and recognition of the truth. With this request he knelt down, and Conrad
baptized him, since at that time there was no appointed servant of the

Word. Then the others in their turn asked Georg to baptize them, which he
did. And so, in great fear of God, together they surrendered themselves to
the Lord. They confirmed one another for the service of the Gospel and
began to teach the faith and to keep it. This was the beginning of
separation from the world and its evil ways.
Soon after this, more people joined them, including Balthasar
Hubmaier of Friedberg, Ludwig Haetzer, and other scholars of German,
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, well acquainted with the Scriptures, as well as
priests, preachers and others. Soon they gave witness with their blood.
Felix Mantz was drowned at Zurich for the sake of the true faith and
baptism, thus giving his life in steadfast witness to the truth.
Later, Wolfgang Uliman was condemned to death and burned at
Waldsee in Switzerland. His ten companions, including his own brothers,
were executed with him. Valiantly and resolutely they gave their lives as a
witness that their faith and baptism were founded on divine truth.
Melchior Veit, Georg Blaurock's traveling companion, was burned at
Ettach for the sake of his faith.
So the movement spread through persecution and great tribulation.
The church increased daily, and the number of the Lord's people grew
quickly. This the enemy of divine truth could not endure, so he used
Zwingli as a tool. Zwingli began to write and preach with fanaticism that
baptism of adult believers was false and should not be tolerated. This was
contrary to his earlier confession, when he himself had taught that not one
clear word from God justified infant baptism. But now, because he wanted
to please men and the world rather than God, he opposed true Christian
baptism. He persuaded the authorities to use the imperial law to behead as
Anabaptists those who were truly dedicated to God, those who out of
conviction had made the bond of a good conscience with him.
Finally Zwingli succeeded in having twenty men, widows, pregnant
women, and young girls thrown into misery in a dark tower. They were to
be shut up with only bread and water and see neither sun nor moon for the
rest of their lives, condemned to remain in the dark tower - the living and

the dead together - to suffocate in the stench, to die and rot, until not one
of them was left. There were some who did not take one bite of bread in
three days so that the others would have something to eat.
At the same time severe mandates were issued at Zwingli's
instigation: from now on, any person in the district of Zurich who was
baptized should be thrown into the water and drowned without any trial or
judgment. This shows the spirit Zwingli belonged to, and his followers
still belong to it.
***************

1526 God's Word Proclaimed
However, God's cause cannot be changed, and God's decisions are
not controlled by human power. Therefore he inspired the men named
above to go out to proclaim the Gospel and foundation of truth.
One of them, Balthasar Hubmaier, went to Nikolsburg in Moravia and
began to preach. The people accepted his message, and in a short time
many were baptized.
Hans Hut also went to Nikolsburg, and several more ministers and
teachers were appointed to preach the Word of God, namely Oswald Glait,
Hans Spittelmaier, Christian Rotmantel, Klein Utz (Little Utz) and Gross
Utz (Big Utz), Hans Werner, Andreas Mosel, and Strutzel, some of whom
had been preachers before. These and others gathered at the castle in
Nikolsburg to consider whether to wear and use the sword and whether to
pay war taxes. They also discussed other problems. But they could not
reach a common understanding and parted in disunity.
Hans Hut was held prisoner in Nikolsburg Castle because he would
not agree with its lord, Leonhard von Liechtenstein, on retaining the use of
the sword. One of Hans Hut's well-wishers, concerned for his safety, took a
net meant for snaring hares and lowered him through a window and over
the wall by night.

The next day the people in the town protested loudly against Lord
Leonhard and his followers for keeping Hut in the castle by force.
Balthasar Hubmaier was moved to speak publicly in the hospice with his
friends because they had previously been unable to agree about the sword
and paying taxes.
During this time the movement grew rapidly, and people were
gathering in such numbers that King Ferdinand was informed of it. He
responded by summoning Lord Leonhard von Liechtenstein (who lived at
Nikolsburg, had been baptized, and was called a brother) to appear before
him in Vienna with his brother, Lord Hans, and all their preachers. And
they complied. Straightaway, Balthasar Hubmaier and his wife were taken
prisoner and sent from Vienna to Kreuzenstein Castle. In prison, Hubmaier
remembered that he had unjustly opposed Hans Hut on several points. He
realized he was guilty of giving far too much to worldly freedom in regard
to retaining the sword. This moved him to write to Nikolsburg,
particularly to his fellow worker Martin, provost at Kanitz, asking him and
the others to change anything that was not right. He added, If Hans Hut
were here now, we would soon be united.
Brother Balthasar Hubmaier was taken from Kreuzenstein back to
Vienna to be questioned on many articles of faith. Finally he was
condemned to death and burned, and a short time afterward his wife was
drowned. Two songs composed by Balthasar Hubmaier are still known in
the church, besides writings that show how powerfully he defended true
baptism and opposed infant baptism with proofs from Holy Scripture. (It
is a great pity that we no longer have these writings, and that only one of
the two songs is still preserved, a song beginning (Freut each, freut euch in
dieser Zeit) (LdHBr 23-25)
He threw light on the true meaning of the Lord's Supper in the same
thorough way and refuted the idolatrous mass and its great error and
deception.
At this time Martin, provost at Kanitz, was summoned before King
Ferdinand in Prague, Bohemia. When he appeared, he was taken prisoner
and sent to the bishop at Kremsier, where the priests left him to starve and
rot in the dungeon.

At this time two brothers came to Nikolsburg from around the Enns
River. Their names were Jakob Wiedemann and Philip Jäger. They heard
Hans Spittelmaier's teaching and tested the life there for several weeks,
but they realized that this group was seriously lacking in the true order of
brotherly discipline according to the Lord's Word. They could not agree to
wearing or using the sword, paying war taxes, and other matters that were
against their own convictions. They therefore admonished the group at
Nikolsburg about all these abuses, because they were not in keeping with
the life and teaching of Christ.
These concerns and the rumor that the Turks were marching on
Vienna led the elders of the church to hold a meeting at Pergen, either in
the minister's house or the inn, to discuss the points mentioned above.
They were unable to reach unanimity and parted in disunity, divided in
their views as in Balthasar Hubmaier's time.
As a result, Jakob Wiedemann, Philip Jager, and others withdrew
from the group at Nikolsburg. They met from time to time in different
houses, received the pilgrims, guests, and strangers from other countries,
and began living in community.
When Hans Spittelmaier discovered this, he spoke in the hospice at
Nikolsburg and taught publicly that the sword, war taxes, and similar
things should be retained. Thereupon Lord Leonhard von Liechtenstein
sought out those who called themselves a community and had them come
to him with their servants of the Word, Jakob and Philip, in order to find
out why they had cut themselves off.
They answered Lord Leonhard that in many areas they had found
serious disorders in the way he and his congregation lived: they did not
give hospitality to guests and strangers, affirmed the sword and war taxes,
and did not live according to the Word of truth - which we considered to be
sufficient reason.
***************

1526 King Ferdinand kills many believers
Then Lord Leonhard said, If you meet separately, and refuse to go to
the worship services my preachers hold, I cannot tolerate you in my
domain. The brothers replied, With God's help we will wait patiently for
whatever the Lord permits to happen to us. At the same time they
earnestly warned Lord Leonhard to consider what he was doing, because
he himself claimed to be a brother. Lord Leonhard responded that he
personally did not object to their devout way of life but that he could not
tolerate them because their presence would cause division among his
brothers. However, the situation remained unchanged throughout the
winter until the following Lent.
In the first week of Lent, King Ferdinand sent the provost all over
Austria to stir up indignation and persecution against the believers in
Christ. Some he put in prison, those he caught in the fields or streets he
beheaded, and the villagers who refused to recant, he hanged on the
gateposts. Therefore many people left Austria for Nikolsburg, and in the
villages around Nikolsburg many left their houses and fled with wife and
children up to the mountains.
Then Lord Leonhard and Lord Hans von Liechtenstein warned the
provost not to interfere within their boundaries or they would present him
with a few cannon balls. At this the provost withdrew.
At about the same time, King Ferdinand sent a savage provost named
Aichelin into Swabia and the province of Wurttemberg. He shed much
innocent blood and burned down the Mantelhof not far from the town of
Aalen, killing about twenty people - men and youths, women and young
girls, including their minister.
The divine truth became known far and wide, and the words of
Scripture were fulfilled throughout the Holy Roman Empire: God allowed
his people, the sheep of his pasture, to be led to the slaughter. There was so
much killing and bloodshed for the sake of divine truth that the whole of
Germany was stained by it. An account of some who suffered is given
here, but only of a few, as follows:

***************

1527-1531 List of those executed in Germany for the sake of
their Faith
In 1527 on May 21, several people were executed at Rottenburg on
the Neckar, including brother Michael Sattler. He was cruelly tortured and
finally burned to ashes. The other brothers were executed with the sword.
The sisters were drowned.
Georg Blaurock from the house of Jakob and one other were executed
about this time at Gufidaun not far from Klausen in the province of Tirol.
They were condemned to be burned alive at the stake.
Thomas Herrmann was burned alive at Kitzbühel. Soon after him
sixty-seven of his fellow believers were killed for the sake of their faith.
In this year of 1527, Leonhard Kaiser, formerly a priest, was
condemned to death and burned alive at Scharding in Bavaria.
In 1528, Leonhard Schiemer was beheaded at Rottenburg and burned
to ashes. Soon after him as many as seventy people witnessed with their
blood in this same place.
Hans Schlaffer and Leonhard Frick were executed with the sword at
Schwaz in the Inn valley. Nineteen people were then executed in the same
place.
Hans Feyerer with five others was sentenced to death and burned at
Munich in Bavaria.
Three of their wives were drowned. Two men of noble birth and a
miller were beheaded.
Thomas and Balthasar, and a companion named Dominicus were
burned to death at Brunn in Moravia.

In 1529, Virgil Plattner was executed with the sword at Scharding in
Bavaria.
Ludwig Haetzer was executed at Constance on the Lake Constance
after a long, wearisome time of imprisonment. He was one of three who
were executed with the sword.
Hans Hut was condemned and burned to death at Augsburg in Swabia.
Hans Langenmantel and one other were executed with the sword at
Weissenhorn.
Wolfgang Brandhuber and Hans Mittermaier with about seventy
faithful believers were condemned to death by water, fire or the sword at
Linz in Upper Austria.
Eucharius Binder and several other believers were locked into a house
in the Salzburg area and burned.
Daniel Kropf and two others were executed with the sword at Graz in
Styria. Four sisters were drowned.

1530
Georg Grunwald was condemned and burned to death at Kufstein on
the Inn. A few days later, another brother was executed with the sword.

1531
Walser Mair and two others were executed with the sword at
Wolfsberg in Carinthia.

Martin Maler and six others were executed with the sword at
Gmunden in Swabia.
Within a very short time, in every corner of the German lands, a great
number of ministers and teachers of the truth had to seal their teaching
with their blood.
Many other believers - who were not teachers - recognized the truth
and were faithful to it, leaving the errors of false Christianity. They were
also executed in those days, just like their teachers, and witnessed with
their blood to what they confessed with their lips, as follows:
In 1527, Georg Wagner of Emmering was burned alive at Munich in
Bavaria because of four articles of faith. We still have a song that tells his
story. (LdHBr, 10,12)
In 1528, three brothers and two sisters were burned alive at Znaim in
Moravia.
In that same year, 1528, nine brothers were beheaded and three young
girls were drowned at Bruck on the Mur in Styria.
Johannes Bair of Lichtenfels was imprisoned in a dungeon at
Bamberg in Franconia for twenty-three years. He died in prison.
In 1529, four brothers and four sisters were captured in Vill, a village
in the Adige Valley, and were taken to the castle. Their names were
Wolfgang from Moos near Deutschnofen, Thomas Imwald from Aldein,
Georg Frick from Wirtsburg, Mang Kager from Füssen, Christine
Tollinger from Penon (a widow), Barbara from Tiers, Agatha Kampner
from Breitenberg, and her sister Elizabeth. On November 16, the Tuesday
after St. Martin's Day, they testified their faith in front of the judge and
nine jurymen, and were then executed.
In 1529, two sisters, Anna Maler and Ursula Ochsentreiber were
sentenced to death for the sake of divine truth and drowned at Hall in the
Inn Valley.

In the same year, nine brothers were beheaded, several sisters were
drowned, and one sister was burned at Alzey on the Rhine. The count
palatine had 350 people executed within a short time, many at Alzey.
Georg Baumann was captured and beheaded at Bauschlet in
Wurttemberg for the sake of his faith.
When God visited the German lands with his Word, many hundreds of
people were executed for their faith, in many provinces, towns, and
marketplaces.
***************

1529 Order for a Christian life drawn up at that time
In 1529 The church community taught practiced and agreed to keep
to the following ordinances showing how a Christian who holds the
apostolic faith should live:
FIRST, when the church assembles, we should ask God from our
hearts for his grace to make his divine will known to us. When parting
from one another, we should give thanks to God and intercede for all
brothers and sisters of the whole Christian church.
SECOND, as Christians we should encourage one another from our
hearts to remain steadfast in the Lord. We should meet frequently, at least
four or five times a week if possible.
THIRD, when a brother or sister does wrong openly, it should be
corrected before the church with loving admonition. If it was done in
secret, it should be disciplined privately, but in accordance with God's
command.
FOURTH, every brother and sister should be fully surrendered to God
and to the church, in body and soul. All gifts received from God should be
held in common, according to the practice of the apostles and the first

church or community of Christ, so that the needy in the church can be
supported as at the apostles' time. (Acts 2:44-45; 4:32-37; 5:1-11)
FIFTH, on behalf of the church, the ministers chosen by the church
community should look after the needs of the poor with great care.
SIXTH, brothers and sisters should lead honest and upright lives and
not be superficial in their speech and behavior, either to one another or to
anyone else, inside the community or outside. (1 Timothy 4:11-13)
SEVENTH, in the meetings of the church community only one at a
time should speak, and the others should listen and use good judgment
about what is said; two or three should not stand up at once. No one should
curse or swear; and idle talk should be avoided, to spare the weak.
EIGHTH, when we meet we should not eat or drink to excess but give
thanks and be moderate with what God created for our nourishment,
serving one or two dishes. After the meal, the tables should be cleared.
NINTH, matters that are dealt with and put right among brothers and
sisters in church meetings are not to be made known outside the church.
As for the open-hearted seeker, at the outset the Gospel should be
proclaimed and explained to him. If that person accepts the Gospel with
joy in his heart and is willing to live accordingly, he should be received by
the church community as a member of Christ.
TENTH, we should be prepared for God's working and for the cross
every day, for we have surrendered ourselves to be disciplined by him.
Everything he lays on us should be received with thanks and borne with
patience; we should not be swayed by rumor or frightened by every wind
that blows.
ELEVENTH, all those who are of one body and one bread in the Lord
and are of one mind should celebrate the Lord's Supper in memory of his
death. At that occasion everyone should be challenged to be like the Lord
in obedience to the Father.

TWELFTH, as we have been taught and warned by the Lord, we
should at all times be watchful and await his coming so that we may be
worthy to go in with him and escape the evil that is to come upon the
world.
Let us now continue to tell how, from the beginning, the church was
cleansed of those who were false and lukewarm. Especially in Moravia, a
genuine gathering and a true ordering of life emerged under great
hardship. The king's provost in Austria stopped his persecution and the
lords of Nikolsburg sent messengers into the mountains and hiding places
in the woods where people had fled, to tell them all to return home and no
longer be afraid.
***************

1528 Jakob Wiedemann and followers separated from sword
bearers
At that time, several servants of the Word and their congregations
settled in Moravia: in Znaim, Eibenschitz, Brünn, and elsewhere. A certain
Gabriel Ascherham came to Rossitz. Born in Nuremberg, he had been a
furrier in Scharding, Bavaria, then moved to Rossitz, where he gathered
the people and taught them. Soon after this, Philip Blauarmel with several
others came to him from Swabia. Gabriel took them into his household
and laid down his ministry in order to give honor and precedence to Philip
and his assistant. But soon Philip's actions no longer pleased Gabriel, so
Gabriel assumed the leadership over his own people again and they
continued living where they were in their own communal households.
Philip moved away with his people and started another community. They
still claimed to be brothers, but their hearts were disunited, and as a result
two groups emerged, the Philippites and the Gabrielites; but more about
this later. *
As explained, the number of people in Nikolsburg kept growing, and
the majority joined Jakob Wiedemann and Philip Jager. Supported by his

assistants and relatives, Hans Spittelmaier in a public sermon at
Nikolsburg forbade his people to have anything to do with Jakob
Wiedemann's people: they should ignore them because they were forming
a separate group. All those who followed Jakob Wiedemann were called
the small group, or Stabler (staff-bearers). **
But the others at Nikolsburg retained the sword and were therefore
called Schwertler (sword-bearers). (They are now called Sabbatarians and
they have the spirit of the Münsterites.)
These events made Lord Leonhard von Liechtenstein summon Jakob
Wiedemann, Philip Jäger, and other ministers and stewards as he had done
before. He ordered them to pack up and vacate his land because they were
setting up a separate church. So they offered their goods for sale - some
they sold, others they left behind - and they all moved away. Afterward,
however, Liechtenstein's people sent on all the goods that had been left
behind.
About two hundred people (not counting children) from Nikolsburg
and Pergen and the surrounding area gathered outside the town of
Nikolsburg. Out of sympathy a number of people came from the city to see
them and wept with them, but others argued with them.
***************

1528 Community of Goods began
The first purification
They started on their way and encamped in a deserted village between
Tannowitz and Muschau and stayed there for a day and a night. They took
counsel together in the Lord because of their immediate need and distress
and appointed servants for temporal affairs: Franz Intzinger from Leoben
in Styria and Jakob Mändel, who had been treasurer to Lord von
Liechtenstein in Nikolsburg, with Thoman Arbeiter and Urban Bader to
help them. (Isaiah 23:18)

TAKE NOTE: These men then spread out a cloak in front of the
people, and each one laid his possessions on it with a willing heart without being forced - so that the needy might be supported in accordance
with the teaching of the prophets and apostles. (Acts 2:44-45; 4:34-35)
Just as they were about to move on, Lord Leonhard von Liechtenstein
came from Nikolsburg with several mounted retainers, asked them where
they were going, and told them they could have stayed at Nikolsburg. By
way of answer they reminded him why he had not allowed them to remain;
they certainly had not acted lightly, but only in the fear of God and for
their consciences' sake, which did not allow them to go along with his
(Leonhard's) brothers and the teachings and way of life of his preachers.
Furthermore, they said, they held it as unchristian that he and his brothers
had threatened the provost with force, for although the provost had been
sent by a higher authority, Leonhard, incited by his preachers, had resisted
him.
They then broke camp and went on. Lord Leonhard rode with them as
far as Wisternitz, where he provided them with a drink and let them
through toll-free. After crossing the bridge, they spent the night on the
right bank by the old temple, the little hermitage, and stayed there for
breakfast the next morning. They tried meanwhile to find wagons to move
their sick people and children.
They traveled that same day as far as Gross Niemtschitz near Nuslau.
From there they sent four men to Austerlitz to request the lords to take
them in and allow them freedom of conscience. They mentioned several
points such as war taxes and other similar things that in the fear of God
they were unable to comply with. These lords agreed and were willing to
accept them, saying that even if there were a thousand of them, they would
take them all in. The lords sent three wagons to meet them so that they
could travel more conveniently.
When they arrived near the town of Austerlitz, the lords gave them a
burned-out, deserted farmstead to live on, where they stayed in the open
for three weeks.

During this time, the following lords visited them: Lord Jan, Lord
Vaclav, Lord Oldrich, and Lord Petr, the lords of Kounice at Austerlitz,
who showed them many kindnesses. The townspeople, too, were very
helpful.
They asked the brothers if they were willing to build their homes
among the people there. The brothers then requested and were granted
permission to build on the potters' market. The lords gave them the wood
they needed and in addition freed them from rent, taxes, compulsory labor,
and other obligations for six years. All this the brothers accepted
thankfully as a blessing from God.
The members of the church now began to increase in number. Zeal
and divine grace moved them to send brothers out to other countries,
especially to Tirol.
As already mentioned, Georg Blaurock, one of the first three, had left
Switzerland with Hans Langegger and was proclaiming the Gospel in
Tirol. In order to bear fruit for the Lord through his gifts and bring
salvation to many, the two brothers traveled in the Gufidaun area, where
they were taken prisoner and killed.
After this, as the love of truth was kindled among the nations, many
were killed in Tirol for their witness, especially in the following places: in
the district of Gufidaun and at Klausen, Brixen, Sterzing, Bozen,
Neumarkt, Kaltern, Terlan, on the Kuntersweg; similarly in the Inn Valley,
at Steinach, Imst, Petersberg, Stams, Innsbruck, Hall, Schwaz, Rattenberg,
Kufstein, and Kitzbühel.
In these places a great number of believers, witnessed steadfastly to
the truth with their blood and were killed by fire, water, or the sword. In
spite of all this suffering, the people of God increased from day to day.
Around that time a man named Jakob appeared, a hatter by trade,
born at Moos in the Puster Valley, half a mile from Bruneck. He accepted
the covenant of grace, the covenant of a good conscience in Christian
baptism, promising to live in true surrender and to go the way of Jesus.

When after a time it was felt that he had abundant gifts from God, he
was chosen for and confirmed in the service of the Gospel. Now the church
in Tirol learned that at Austerlitz, in Moravia, God had gathered a people
in his name to live as one in heart, mind, and soul, each caring faithfully
for the other. So they were moved to send Jakob Hutter with Simon
Schützinger and some companions to the church at Austerlitz to make
inquiries about all that had taken place.
After the church in Tirol had taken leave of them and commended
them to the care of God, they went to Austerlitz. There they talked
everything over thoroughly with the elders of the church, as the church in
Tirol had said they should. They found that both groups were of one heart
and soul in serving and fearing God. Thereupon Jakob and Simon and their
companions, in the name of the whole church, united in peace with the
church at Austerlitz.
As they had now accomplished their mission and brought to a happy
conclusion all that had been entrusted to them, they wished to report all
this to their own people, so Jakob and Simon with their companions
prepared for the road again. After a fitting leave-taking, the community at
Austerlitz sent them on their way with peaceful hearts and in unity of
spirit, commended to God and his grace for their return home.
***************

1529 Purification of the Church community
In this year many brothers were arrested in Upper Austria, and some
were executed. Among those arrested was Peter Ridemann, born at
Hirschberg in Silesia, a cobbler by trade, who was taken prisoner at
Gmunden on St. Andrew's Eve (Nov. 29) in 1529. Although he was
tortured by many means, almost to the point of death, he remained
faithful. Finally, after having lain in prison for over three years, he was
freed by the providence of God.

The most prominent teacher in the church at Austerlitz was Jakob
Wiedemann, also known as one-eyed Jakob. His assistants were Franz
Intzinger, Jakob Mändel, Kilian [Volckamer], and others, all appointed to
the service of the Word at Austerlitz.
When Jakob Hutter was sent back to the believers in the mountains of
Tirol, as just described, he joyfully told them about the community of
saints he had seen and learned to know at Austerlitz. He told how, in the
name of them all, he had united with those at Austerlitz in peace and unity
of soul and spirit and how they had sent him on his way home to Tirol in
peace. God had opened the way for them with his blessing and care. The
whole community was full of joy, giving praise and thanks to God with all
their hearts.
At this time, in autumn 1529, quite a few brothers, with Hans Fasser
as their minister or elder, were living at Böhmisch Krumau, and formed a
group to express their unity in the Spirit. Their hearts were moved when
they heard of the uniting between Jakob Hutter and the church at
Austerlitz. All created things show that like cleaves to like, so they, too,
enthusiastically sought out those who shared their beliefs and wanted to
become one with them in Christ. They united with them in seeking a more
perfect life - a group of about eighty or ninety persons, among them Hans
Amon or Tuchmacher, Leonhard Seiler or Lanzenstiel, and Christoph
Gschal. All of them remained in the church at Austerlitz except their
minister, Hans Fasser, who returned to Bohemia, making it appear that he
had reason to do so. But he was caught in shameful fornication and was
later severely disciplined by the church, excluded, and delivered up to
Satan.
From this time on, since there was no place available in Tirol because
of the excessive oppression, Jakob Hutter, with Simon Schützinger, sent
people to the church at Austerlitz. He sent a servant of the Word, Georg
Zaunring by name, along with them, and afterward he sent one small group
after another, with all their belongings, to live in community with the
believers.
At this time, the end of 1529, a man named Wilhelm Reublin came to
Austerlitz, claiming to be a teacher or servant of the Word, but as nothing

was known about him, he was not permitted to teach. Meanwhile the devil
- who does not rest but prowls around the house of God like a roaring lion,
seeking every opportunity to cause division, destroy the unity of spirit, (1
Peter 5:8) and stamp out what God gives - made an attack at the critical
place, namely, at the elders of the church, who were responsible for the
whole life of the people, as the devout Judith testifies in her book. (Judith
8:24)
They had no place where everyone could meet to hear the teachings,
because it was winter and extremely cold. Therefore, they decided to hold
their meetings in three places, and for each place a particular minister was
appointed to teach, exhort, and comfort his little flock.
Their teachings differed, however. One taught this and another taught
something different. One of them declared, among other things, that Christ
had been a citizen of Capernaum and that therefore as citizens it was
permissible to do civilian duties and swear oaths.
Besides this, Jakob Wiedemann told several young sisters that if they
would not follow his suggestions about Marriage, he would have to give
heathen wives to the brothers. He and some of his assistants alarmed the
sisters with strange questions and gave them texts to learn. Those who
could remember the texts and answer the questions clearly were highly
praised, but the simple, unassuming sisters, although faithful and devout,
were ridiculed and put to shame.
There were so many people, with their numbers increasing daily, that
they were not all able to live in one house. Some of the ministers who had
learned more than one language - Franz Intzinger, Jakob Mändel, among
others - came to think highly of themselves and supplied food and drink to
one another, which was not in order. As is generally known, arrogance
goes before destruction and pride goes before a fall. In the same selfseeking spirit some members who had kept money in their pockets went to
market to buy what they liked for themselves. (Proverbs 16:18)
All these disorders and more were noticed by those who fought
against avarice, and this caused a great deal of complaint among the
people. Especially those from Tirol complained about the teaching given

in meetings and said it was not as assuring and constructive as it had been
at home. Similarly, many were troubled and complained about church
discipline and the children's education, saying that in these and related
matters not nearly enough was done. They reported these things to their
particular minister, Georg Zaunring, who also became very disturbed
about it and began discussing it with some of his assistants and servants of
the Word, who all agreed with him, especially Burkhard [Braun] of Ofen,
Bohemian David of Schweidnitz, and Adam Schlegel. *
***************

1530 Reublin preaches without authority
Early in 1530, Wilhelm Reublin began reading rather loudly one
evening in one of the rooms. When people gathered around him to listen,
he also expounded the Scriptures to them, although he had not been given
the authority to teach. God cannot bear disorder in his church, so he seeks
ways to change it even through ill-suited people, as is seen here and in
what follows.
Wilhelm Reublin began to speak openly in the church against all the
offenses committed by the ministers. As Jakob Wiedemann, who was
entrusted with the care of the whole church, was not at home, his assistants
sent messengers to him without delay. As soon as he came, he summoned
all the elders, from wherever they lived, and placed the whole matter
before them in the presence of Georg Zaunring and the other ministers
who supported him. This took place in private at first. Reublin, however,
persisted in what he had said and by scriptural proof tried to convince
Jakob Wiedemann and all his followers that they were neither teaching nor
standing rightly. Jakob Wiedemann and his supporters did not accept this
but called the church together. He told the people how, in his absence,
Reublin had pushed himself forward, teaching things that were opposed to
what Jakob and his assistants taught, which could not be tolerated. At the
end of a long speech that Jakob made before the church, he said that

whoever acknowledged his teaching to be right and had changed his life
through it should come and stand next to him.
Wilhelm Reublin then asked them, for the sake of God, to give him a
chance to answer. Likewise, Georg Zaunring, Bohemian David, Burkhard
of Ofen, and Adam Schlegel unanimously requested the people to hear
Reublin's reply, since they had heard Jakob Wiedemann's charges. The
church could then decide which side was right and which was wrong, as
would only be fair before God and man. But their request was rejected
outright.
Now most of the people went over to Jakob Wiedemann's side, many
of them without knowing why, since not all of them had heard Jakob's
accusations. About forty or fifty persons remained standing with Zaunring
and Reublin, eager to hear Reublin's reply in order to be fair. But the
others would not give in.
Jakob Wiedemann then called several of his followers and sent them
to Georg Zaunring and his group to inquire why they were not standing
with him. They replied that, having heard Jakob Wiedemann's accusation
against Reublin, their request now as before was, for God's sake, to let
Reublin's answer be heard as well. This would enable the church to decide
what was right before God, for no one should judge a matter that had not
been given a hearing. But, as before, this was unjustly refused them. In
other words, they were resisted tooth and nail.
Jakob Wiedemann warned his people to have nothing to do with the
others. Such conduct drove many of his earlier followers to go over to
Zaunring and Reublin.
When Jakob Wiedemann's people were called to a meal, the others
were treated as though they were excluded. They had handed in what little
they had, and if there had been fairness, they would have been glad to
remain. But they had to leave empty-handed.
Zaunring and Reublin and their people gathered outside the house,
sick at heart. Reublin shook the dust from his shoes as a testimony against
the high-handed action of Jakob Wiedemann and all who stayed with him.

Then they set out, first finding lodging for their children and sick people
in the town and leaving a minister, Burkhard of Ofen, to care for them and
comfort them.
***************

1530 The Second Purification
Zaunring and his assistants, with about 150 other people, made ready
to move to Auspitz. Once outside the city of Austerlitz the ministers
named above spoke very earnestly to the people, saying that whoever
wanted to go with them should be ready, with them, to face the poverty of
Christ and possibly even death. All the money they had between them
amounted to only a farthing per person. Therefore, anyone who did not
feel the courage to suffer hunger, great need, misery, and poverty for the
sake of truth should rather return to the city or to his home. But all of them
wanted to carry on, trusting in God. Not one turned back.
It was in this way that God again brought about a purification,
separating the true believers from the unbelievers. Those who remained
with Jakob Wiedemann are therefore still known today as the Austerlitz
Brethren. All those who set out with Zaunring succeeded in reaching
Auspitz as planned, although they traveled in terror of highwaymen. They
were housed and given refuge by the people there, but had to suffer great
need and hunger, for they were quite ignorant of the country and the work
in the vineyards. Besides this, they had no provisions and often had to be
content with water and a small piece of bread for a whole day, doing hard
work. Yet they still cared for the sick and the children so far as they were
able with their humble means. They brought their people from Austerlitz
and lodged them at Steurowitz, half a mile away from Auspitz, hoping
they would be safe there. But soon, robbers came by night, took all they
had, and beat some brothers so severely that one of them died. Deep called
to deep, (Ps.42:6-7). and great endurance was demanded of the saints.
There was a man named Kaspar who had a house at Auspitz. Some time
previously he had come from the community at Austerlitz. He pretended

to have a repentant heart and a wish to reunite with Zaunring and his
people; but he was putting on a false front. He took the brothers into his
home, pretending to be happy to give them lodging. He let them work in
his vineyard with scarcely any food, until the time the grapes were
gathered in. Then he revealed his treachery, gave up all pretense of
brotherhood, and ordered them out of his house empty-handed.
Throughout these hardships the believers cared faithfully for the
weak and distressed, supplying their needs. They brought them to Auspitz,
where they had purchased a house near the horse market by agreement
with the nuns at Brünn, who owned the land and lent them money. They
began to gather in this house and to care for their children, with a Godfearing brother and several sisters to educate them in the discipline and
ways of the Lord; but at night the children slept with their parents.
At this time two brothers from Auspitz, Hans Amon and a
companion, and two from Austerlitz were sent to Tirol to report to the
church about the division that had taken place. These four asked the
church in Tirol to send brothers to look into the matter.
At the same time, because God wished to purify his people and
because sinners cannot remain in the church of the righteous, it happened
that a minister of a little group in Swabia arrived in Auspitz to inquire
about the faith, daily order, and teaching of the church of God. He spoke
with Wilhelm Reublin about various articles of faith. As they could not
agree on one point, this minister from Swabia did not want to stay. The
other brothers and elders asked him why he was leaving, and he told them
how Reublin had explained one of the articles. The elders said, But this is
not the position of the church. They suggested that perhaps he had
misunderstood. The man insisted that this was what he had heard from
their teacher, Reublin.
Then the elders questioned Reublin. He denied it, but the man from
Swabia still insisted on what he had said before and called upon God as
witness. When Reublin was severely admonished, he, too, called on God as
his witness. Finally he was proved wrong by others who had also heard
him, and he had to admit his guilt and confess that he had spoken as the

man had testified. The elders told Reublin that the matter was too serious
for them to close.
Soon after, Reublin became extremely ill. Without the knowledge of
the elders and the church and regardless of the great hunger among the
people, he had hidden twenty-four gulden that he had brought with him
from his home. In his illness he entrusted this money to a married sister
named Katharina Loy, who immediately reported it. This made it even
harder for the elders to close the matter.
Around this time, Jakob Hutter and Simon Schützinger arrived from
Tirol. They examined Reublin's situation carefully summoned him before
the church. He was excluded as an unfaithful, malicious Ananias. He
himself admitted that such a go into the matter judgment was right.
Jakob Hutter and Simon Schützinger had been asked by the
communities at Austerlitz and Auspitz to go into the matter of the division
and to administer discipline. After they had examined the matter
thoroughly and considered it in the fear of God, they found those at
Austerlitz most guilty; when Jakob admonished them, however, they
would not listen to him. Undeterred, he showed them their error and
rebuked them for their lack of discernment: In the first place they had
acted unjustly in expelling the innocent.
Second, they had allowed freedom of the flesh, resulting in a return to
private property. Third, there had been Marriages with unbelievers, and
there were many similar points. But no warning or punishment helped.
One freedom of the flesh led to another, as the false teaching in their
printed statement of faith still proves. It was impossible to distinguish
them from worldly people. Although they still claimed to hold to their
first calling, their lives showed next to nothing of it. Only the name was
left. Yet in a wonderful way the Lord gradually brought back to the church
those at Austerlitz who were still devout.
When Jakob Hutter and Simon Schützinger had brought this matter to
a satisfactory conclusion, as they had been asked to do, they entrusted the
church to Georg Zaunring. Both of them were commended to the grace of

God, and they set out for the church in Tirol, where God had been
powerfully at work.
***************

1531 Bohemian David and Georg Zaunring excluded
The middle of 1531 brought further testing. Since God always seeks
to advance the work he has begun, he was resolved to build up and purify
his church. It will be told below how he gave his people, whom he called
the salt of the earth, such zeal that they would not spare the eye, hand, or
foot that was hurting the body of Christ.
Their minister Adam Schlegel misled some members into
licentiousness and behaved in a scandalous manner. As soon as this was
revealed, he was disciplined, his ministry was taken from him, and he was
forbidden to teach. But some of his own kind sided with him, including
another minister, Burkhard of Ofen. These two looked for every excuse to
find fault with the church (as people do who want to abandon their
friends), but there was nothing they could truthfully bring forward. So
both of them were excluded from the church as opponents of the truth.
It also became clear that Bohemian David was not honest. Without
the knowledge of the brothers, he had paid the judge at Nikoltschitz for an
escort to protect them from robbers on the way from Austerlitz to Auspitz.
He was admonished in a brotherly way for his faults but was unable to
honor God humbly, persisting in his own opinion. So he was disciplined
before the whole church.
God, wanting to put his people to a severe test to find out whether
they relied on him or on men, now caused a great deal of talk and
complaining to break out in the church. It came to light that Bohemian
David and Georg Zaunring had agreed incident. To settle in secret an
offense deserving the ban, which should have come before the whole
church: Thomas Lindl had committed adultery with Georg Zaunring's
wife, so David and Georg excluded them. Georg had separated himself

from his wife during her exclusion, but as soon as David and Georg
proclaimed the forgiveness of sin, Georg took back his wife.
When it became known, the brotherhood could not accept such light
punishment of adultery, for according to the Word of the Lord it is better
to enter the kingdom of God with one eye or as a cripple than to go to hell
with corrupt members.
Later Leonhard Schmerbacher, a servant for temporal affairs, brought
the matter before the church and told what Georg Zaunring had done. The
whole church agreed unanimously that members of Christ should have no
part in adultery, and therefore those involved should be excluded and
separated from the church.
Now the church was without a shepherd, teacher, or servant of the
Word, but there was great zeal for the truth, and wrong was punished
without regard of persons.
Those in the steward's service, along with the whole church,
immediately let those in Tirol know of their need by letter and word of
mouth. They made a heartfelt plea for a minister to be sent to care for
them with the Word of the Lord.
Jakob Hutter and Simon Schützinger were sent off immediately,
arriving at Auspitz around Easter. They consoled the church and praised
them for acting so zealously against wrong.
Jakob approved what they had done. He said it could have been done
differently but he would accept that it had been handled in the right way.
Simon Schützinger was appointed shepherd of the church in place of
Georg Zaunring.
Jakob and Simon soon united with Gabriel Ascherham and Philip
Blauarmel and their people at Rossitz and Auspitz. From now on the three
groups were no longer to act separately in difficult matters but to seek
each other's counsel as befits a united people. Since all the needs of the
church had been seen to and all disorder put right, Jakob Hutter returned
once more to the church in Tirol. Simon, Gabriel, and Philip looked after

the three communities together, yet each remained at his own place with
his community.
Zaunring admitted his sin and said many times that his heartfelt wish
was to change. He was taken back into the church with intercession to the
Lord on his behalf. As his whole life continued upright, he was again
entrusted with the service of the Gospel and later sent to Franconia. Not
far from Bamberg, he was executed with the sword for the sake of divine
truth.
During this time the number of people in the church increased daily
at all three places. From Silesia they came to Rossitz, from Swabia and the
Palatinate they joined Philip's group, and Jakob Hutter sent many from
Tirol to Schützinger. So the work of the Lord spread more and more. *
***************

1532 Profane soldiers mistreat the faithful
In 1532, a profane mob of soldiers on their way from Prague in
Bohemia to Hungary attacked the faithful. At Rossitz they plundered
Gabriel's people with tremendous uproar and violence. Then they came to
Auspitz, where they attacked Schützinger's people and carried off
everything they could. The brothers and sisters had to stand by and watch
helplessly. The wanton rabble treated the elders of the church
outrageously. They wanted money, but as there was very little, they beat
the brothers and tore off their clothes.
Then they turned on the sisters and neither respected nor spared their
womanhood. In the middle of their attack, they found a little money in a
small earthenware pot. God, who hates robbery, caused them to fight over
this small sum, each one hoping to get a large amount. During the struggle
one of them shot and killed a fellow soldier. As Job says, robbery was
turned into the gall of asps within him. In their shock, the soldiers ran
away. Although they attacked Philip's people, too, they did not do as much
harm.

The faithful left all vengeance to God, the righteous Judge, who
rewards each one according to his deeds.
Toward the end of 1532, a servant of the Word, Peter Ridemann, a
native of Hirschberg in Silesia, came from Upper Austria. For more than
three years he had been in prison there at Gmünden, subjected to great
pain, hunger, and mistreatment. But he persevered in his faith and was
released.
In 1532, seven brothers and other believers in Christ were taken
prisoner for the sake of divine truth at Sterzing in the Adige region.
The brothers were Lamprecht Gruber, Hans Beck, Lorenz Schuster,
Peter Planer, Peter his manservant, Hans Taler, and Kuntz Fichter. They
were cruelly tortured and stretched on the rack to make them recant, but
they remained steadfast and were condemned to death and executed. All
witnessed valiantly to the truth of God with their blood. We still have
letters they wrote to the church from prison.
***************

1533 Jacob Hutter returns from Tirol
After Georg Zaunring was martyred in 1533, the church sent Peter
Ridemann into Franconia. He and his companion, Six Braitfus, were soon
captured and taken to Nuremberg. Braitfus was whipped, but Peter was
detained for four years and some weeks. The Nuremberg people and their
priests tormented him and tried many ways to make him fall, but the Lord
stood by him and on July 14, 1537, delivered him from their hands, as will
be recorded later.
Brother Ludwig Fest, a steadfast witness, was taken prisoner at
Schwaz in the Inn Valley in 1533 and was executed because of his valiant
testimony to Jesus Christ.

Also in this year, seven brothers were arrested at Gufidaun in the
Adige Valley. These were: Hans Beck, Walser Schneider, Christian
Alseider, Waltan Gsäl, Wolf of Götzenberg, Hans Maurer of Flaas, and
Peter Kranewetter. All were condemned to death and executed. While in
prison they had written several letters showing that they were determined
to remain faithful unto death. They invited Jakob Hutter and Hans Amon
to their wedding, meaning their execution.
Jakob Hutter was in the mountains of Tirol, proclaiming the Lord's
Word and doing the Lord's work. He traveled around, visiting those who
were eager to hear the truth, helping them, and setting them on the right
path. He sent one group after another down to Schützinger in Auspitz since
the intense persecution made it impossible for them to remain in Tirol.
Everywhere they were spied on and betrayed, hunted down, and seized by
the constables.
Not long afterward, Jakob Hutter, too, came to Auspitz with several
others, arriving on August 11, 1533. The elders and the whole church
welcomed him with great joy, and he himself rejoiced from his heart that
God had led him safely to them. He told Simon Schützinger and the other
elders and brothers and sisters that he had not come to strangers but to his
dear brothers, his little children. Schützinger and all the others echoed his
words, asking Jakob to help them care for the people, and he promised to
do so. Jakob had also brought them a temporal gift, a sweet offering, a
small sum of money to repay the nuns of Brünn (who owned the land at
Auspitz) for the loan they had made in a time of need.
On the following Sunday, Jakob Hutter shared news of the church in
distant lands, telling of the believers he had left behind in Tirol, who were
suffering harsh persecution. He delivered their greetings and told about the
wonderful deeds God had worked in spite of many tribulations. Then he
announced publicly that he had heard there were some in Auspitz who
hoped that when he came he would move with them to a different place.
As far as he knew he had challenged and admonished all of them, making
it clear that he had no such intentions. He would help punish according to
God's Word any fickle, selfish people who still wanted to go somewhere

else. And since God had sent him to the church, he would put all his
efforts into overcoming any faults he found in the house of God.
***************

1533 Account of the split between the three communities
Just in these days Georg Fasser of Rattenberg in the Inn Valley
wanted to put all his possessions at the disposal of the church. As head of
the family, he told his wife and children they should willingly join him in
doing this for the Lord and his people, and he lost no time in bringing his
bed and chests into the communal storeroom. When the servants of the
Word examined all his things and made careful inquiries, it was found that
without her husband and children's knowledge, his wife had kept some of
his money and had hidden it. She was admonished and disciplined by the
ministers, her husband, and Schützinger.
After this woman had deceived her husband and hidden money from
him, Jakob was concerned that Simon's wife, too, might turn out to be a
Sapphira, for God had given Jakob the gift of discernment. He brought his
concern to the elders and said, If you will support me in the strength of
God, we will take the matter up and look into it thoroughly. The elders
readily agreed and told him he should begin at once - start with his own
room and continue with the rooms of the elders, including Simon's.
When they came to Simon and asked him to let them take a look in
order to set their hearts at rest, he was perfectly willing. As they were
looking through a chest, they found a too plentiful supply of bed linen and
shirts and four pounds in Bernese money, all in small coins. Jakob pleaded
with him in the name and power of the Lord, asking him to unburden his
heart, to tell whether he knew anything about the money, and not to
conceal anything else that was there. Simon then confessed that he had
known about it. He reached under the roof and brought out forty gulden.
Jakob and the other ministers were appalled. They could hardly believe
that he knowingly would have done such a thing: he taught full surrender

and community to others and yet did not hold to it himself. Jakob pointed
out his dishonesty and sent immediately for Philip [Blauarmel], but he was
not at home.
Since Simon had been found guilty of such great deception, they
could not postpone dealing with his sin. Early the next morning, on
October 5, they called him before the brotherhood, and Jakob informed
them of his faithlessness, greed, and treachery of heart. The whole
brotherhood was horrified. The brothers and sisters began to lament and
weep loudly in pain and heaviness of heart. As was only right and just, he
was excluded in the power of Christ, according to the Word of the Lord,
and given over to Satan. He confessed before the whole brotherhood that
he deserved this discipline, but longed for grace and mercy. Jakob urged
him to repent, and Simon promised to do so with all his might. Fasser's
wife and other unfaithful members were also separated from the church.
The whole brotherhood had previously chosen Schützinger as Elder in
preference to Jakob. Now that Schützinger was found to be a deceiver,
Jakob exhorted all the brothers and sisters to consider how they had talked
and acted and what sort of decision they had made. It had been said that
he, Jakob, did not have the gifts to be a shepherd to such a people; instead
they had chosen Schützinger. And so they were once more completely
without a shepherd, for as they had had so little respect for the Lord's
Word, he, Jakob, was no longer certain about serving them. He challenged
them, however, to pray earnestly, calling on God to raise up a faithful
shepherd and minister for them.
For eight days and nights they prayed earnestly to God. They sent two
brothers to Gabriel at Rossitz to tell him of their need and to ask his
advice about what they should do. He, too, suggested Jakob Hutter.
As they persevered in prayer, God granted them oneness of heart and
mind. They accepted Jakob as a gift from God to be their shepherd, and
were all united in great love.
On October 12, the whole church rejoiced in spite of all their
troubles. They confessed before God and to Jakob that they had done
wrong in giving precedence and honor to a deceiver. They admitted that

Simon had not been the servant of God they had believed him to be. But
because he was known to God, who knows all hearts, he had been revealed
to God's own people. They prayed earnestly and unanimously for
forgiveness for their sin and lack of discernment. God forgave them
because they had acted in blindness, and he blessed them. The Word of
God grew in power among them; peace, love, and the fear of God
increased daily; wrongdoers were separated from the church and the
devout were taken in.
But when love, justice, and true judgment according to God's
commandment increased - when the entire church lived in true peace - the
devil, that ancient serpent, could not rest. He strove day and night to
destroy this work by his cunning and to tear apart the bond of love.
It did not take long before the Gabrielite community at Rossitz and
the Philippite community at Auspitz split away from the Hutterian church.
The reasons were as follows: The God-fearing reader will have seen from
events already described that Gabriel and Philip had favored and strongly
supported Simon's unfitting, unjust attack on Jakob.
They had forced Jakob to give precedence to Simon, whom God later
exposed as a deceiver and who was excluded from the church.
Then Jakob Hutter was reinstated as Elder and shepherd by
unanimous decision of the brotherhood: the brothers and sisters confessed
they had been wrong to put him in second place, and asked his forgiveness.
In all this, Gabriel and Philip and their followers still looked for reasons to
mock and slander Jakob and the church.
They said that Jakob had bought over the people with the gift of
money he brought to the church, that the people idolized him and had
excluded Simon out of spite.
This caused a further crisis. Gabriel, Philip, and their followers broke
out in lies and abuse against Jakob and his brotherhood, who consequently
excluded them as liars and enemies of the truth. But Gabriel's and Philip's
people supported their leaders.

They would not listen to Jakob Hutter's brotherhood or accept the
exclusion. The Philippites and Gabrielites were then shunned as well as
their teachers.
***************

1533 Simon Schützinger's deception
God has since led out and brought to the church any faithful hearted,
God-fearing members left among them.
The above is a short but accurate report of how division occurred
among the three communities at Auspitz in Moravia, and how the church
of God named after Jakob Hutter, their shepherd, had to suffer the sorrow
and opposition stirred up in every possible way by the devil.
Anyone who reads this report should take care lest reading of
rebellion and false spirits becomes a stumbling block for him. There must
be stumbling blocks to reveal the chosen people, but woe to those who
make stumbling blocks. And you, innocent and honest reader, rejoice in
the Lord your God.
The matter ended on November 22, 1533.
***************

1533 The Third Purification
In Tirol, persecution increased day by day, and there was almost
nowhere for the believers to go. Many were captured and killed for the
sake of truth. The priests, too, thundered from their pulpits that people
should watch for them, seize them, and destroy the believers by fire and
the sword. Again and again, large sums of money were promised to anyone
who would inform on them, and this led to frequent spying against them.

Because the brothers were so hard pressed that they were unable to
stay in Tirol, Jakob Hutter and the church with him were moved to send
messages by letter and word of mouth, telling them to leave Tirol as soon
as possible and to come to the church community in Moravia. In response,
Hans Amon and several brothers and sisters set out and with God's help
reached the church at Auspitz.
***************

1533 Severe persecution in Tirol
Meanwhile a brother called Bastel Glaser and his people in Tirol
started on their way to the church, but on arriving at Hohenwart, a village
in Austria, they were arrested. Jakob Hutter wrote them a letter of comfort,
which is still in existence. They were taken to Eggenburg, where their
cheeks were burned through, and they were released.
Around that time Onophrius Griesinger, a servant of the church,
traveled from Tirol with other devout brothers and sisters and under God's
protection reached the church of God at Auspitz.
God wanted to make manifest his elect, who are revealed by great
afflictions, as gold is proved in the fire. So he tested the faithful but
hardened the hearts of sinners and hypocrites. In any case, the devil begins
all his work in the name of God and under the appearance of truth.
Wherever God builds his church, the devil builds a new chapel alongside
to confuse and blind people. So now the devil played his hand through the
Münsterites. He started the trouble in the Westphalian city of Munster,
where several Lutheran preachers met in 1532. In 1533 they were joined
by Jan van Leyden, a tailor from Holland, who used Scripture to testify
that infant baptism was not commanded by God but that adults and
believers should be baptized. A number of people joined him and raised a
great outcry against those who held infant baptism to be right. They
robbed such citizens of their goods and forced them to flee from the city.
In 1534 when the bishop of the diocese laid siege to the city, they resisted

him. Jan van Leyden appointed the mayor as executioner, claiming that
God had directed him to set the highest in the lowest positions.
This Jan set up a government according to Jewish custom and
instituted a new religion, saying, for instance, that a man could take as
many wives as he wished. Then he made himself king in royal splendor
and in his foolishness believed that he would rule the whole world and
possess the throne of his father David until the heavenly Father would
claim the kingdom from him. He thought that when the ungodly were
destroyed, the faithful alone would rule on earth.
But after the siege had gone on for a long time, the city fell at last.
The evil king and two of his companions were captured and taken around
the country as a spectacle for the princes. Then they were tortured horribly
with red-hot tongs and killed. They were finally placed in iron cages and
hung from the highest tower of the city, the king in the middle, a man's
height above the others. This took place on January 24, 1536.
The actions of these infamous people brought intense suffering to the
church of God in many places. A great number of the faithful were
imprisoned and tortured because of this sect. But the whole church and all
devout hearts testified steadfastly, some even with their death, against all
this cruel abomination, this invention of the devil. The church of true
believers will never have outward weapons, whether few or many, with
which to fight their enemies.
***************

1534 Jan van Leyden's kingdom of Münsterites
In 1535 the whole church, wanting from the beginning to follow the
best and most perfect way and to abstain from the world and all
ungodliness, unanimously decided in the fear of God to be on their guard
against the leaven of the scribes and Pharisees, in accordance with Christ's
teaching. This was because the pope, priests, monks, nuns, and all who

preach for their belly's sake are the greatest cause of idolatry and of
hypocritical, sinful living.
The brotherhood decided that from then on, no member would work
for them, trade with them, eat or drink or have anything at all to do with
them without a very specific and godly reason, because all their profits
come from and are used in the service of idolatry. Though they call
themselves preachers of the Gospel, they neither practice Christ's teaching
nor bring it to others.
After this decision the brotherhood gave notice to the abbess of the
Queen's Cloister at Brünn, the landowner of Auspitz, that they could no
longer work in the vineyards or other places for her or for other people in
the same position. This was not because of pride but because, in the fear of
God, they were troubled that they might take part in serving idolatry,
which would surely be against God in heaven.
The explanation infuriated the abbess and she ordered the community
off her lands. Since no other way was found, the community moved out of
Auspitz on Ascension Day 1535, leaving their houses and going to
Schakwitz on the lands of the lord marshal. There they made every effort
to start building for themselves and their children, but their stay did not
last long.
The events at Münster, already reported, were now running their
course and furthering the God-ordained work of testing the faithful. As a
result, the emperor, king, princes, and all the worldly leaders opposed the
gathering of believers. The king soon issued a stern command that no one
belonging to the communities of true believers should be tolerated in the
land.
In particular, a strict order was sent to the lord marshal at Mährisch
Kromau to expel the brothers without delay on pain of great disfavor and
punishment. So it had to happen, however reluctant he might have been
(for he had a great love for the Lord's people and he instructed Jakob
Hutter, that heroic Christian, to gather his people together again when
these troubles were over). He sent his officers to summon all the neighbors
from the villages nearby. They soon came with drums beating, flags flying,

and weapons in hand to the community at Schakwitz. Then the officers
began by expressing the earnest request of their master that the brethren
should spare him and not bring disgrace on him, for he, too, could not
oppose the higher authorities but had to be obedient to them.
For a long time they discussed the matter back and forth, each side
taking counsel among themselves, but there was no other way. The faithful
had to leave their home, as it is written: They had to leave city or village
and camp out in the fields.
***************

1535 Decision to cease working for priests
So Jakob Hutter took his bundle on his back. His assistants did the
same, and the brothers and sisters and all their children went in pairs,
following their shepherd Jakob through the crowd of ungodly, villainous
robbers, who ground their teeth in rage, full of lust to rob and attack. They
were unable to do so, however, because of the presence of the officers,
which was in accordance with God's will.
The little band of the righteous were driven into the open like a herd
of sheep. They were not permitted to camp anywhere until they had left
their lord's lands. Although they had only just moved to Schakwitz a few
days earlier, they were driven out again. A very few of the sick people
remained in the house, but not for long. This persecution took place in
1535. *
While the lord's people camped on Liechtenstein land near Tracht in
Starnitz under Lassling, they were denounced to the authorities and falsely
accused of carrying guns. The governor sent his couriers to the camp to
find out if it was true, but instead of muskets and spears they found many
children and sick people. When Jakob Hutter pleaded with the governor's
servants and told them the whole story, they requested that the
community's ideas and intentions be conveyed to their lord in writing. So
Jakob Hutter, who at that time was the leading minister and shepherd of

the believers, wrote a letter to the governor and sent it by his messengers.
In this letter he explained something of the church's attitude to
government authority. Vengeance was completely foreign to them; they
were free from all desire for it. At the same time he proclaimed God's
judgment and punishment on all tyrants and persecutors of the divine
truth. We still have this letter, but it is too long to include here.
The governor read this letter from the church, brought to him by his
couriers, and immediately sent his servants back with strict orders to
arrest Jakob Hutter. God gave foresight and presence of mind to the
faithful, however, so that Jakob was not found in the house at Schakwitz or
among the people in the camp. Instead they arrested Wilhelm Griesbacher
of Kitzbtihel, in the steward's service, and Loy Salztrager of Hall in the
Inn Valley, and took these two to Brünn, where they racked and burned
them, questioning them under torture about money or goods supposed to
be in the possession of the poor fugitives. The brothers told them plainly
that they and their fellow believers had not been driven out of their
fatherland and inheritance for the sake of money or earthly treasure but
had come to this country for the sake of God's truth. On the basis of this
confession, Wilhelm was sent, guiltless, to be burned alive.
Since Jakob Hutter was in such great danger that he could no longer
serve the church by teaching in public and could never let himself be seen,
it was unanimously decided by the church of God that he should move for
a time to Tirol, there to gather the saints of the Lord.
Jakob Hutter entrusted the church to Hans Amon and advised them
how to proceed in case they should need another minister. The church
accepted this from God in great thankfulness. They commended Jakob to
the grace of God with sorrowful hearts and many tears, and after a solemn
leave-taking, they sent him on his way with the prayers of the church.
The people out on the open heath moved from place to place,
unwilling to part from one another. But when they were refused all
provisions and even water, they at last had to separate into groups of eight
or ten. Each brother with the little group entrusted to him had it laid on his
heart very earnestly that they should care for one another as God gave
them grace and that no one should hold back from helping another. It was

said in particular that nobody should leave Moravia without asking advice.
This separation was quite pitiful; with many tears they set off like
Abraham, not knowing where God would grant them a place to live. In the
time following, Hans Amon and his assistants carried out their ministry as
well as they could, making every effort to visit the people wherever they
were, up and down the country, and faithfully providing for all their needs
as far as possible. The people wandered about the land in misery and
suffering for almost a whole year.
As there was little hope then of finding a place in Moravia where they
could settle, Leonhard Lanzenstiel, with those entrusted to him, took on
harvesting and later other work for Lord Hans Fünfkirchen at Steinebrunn
in Austria, not far from the Moravian border. They remained there for
some time.
In Tirol, Jakob Hutter traveled about in great need and anguish of
heart, sparing no effort to bring salvation to many.
He visited the people with the Word of God and gathered them under
great difficulty, for throughout the country strict mandates were issued
against them. For example, the judge of Brixen rode into Lusen,
summoned all the men, women, and children able to walk, and read out a
brutal mandate forbidding anyone to lodge or shelter us. If anyone did, he
would be punished more severely than ever before and his house would be
burned to the ground, for his lord at Brixen would not tolerate such people
but would root them out. Soon after this he captured several brothers and
sisters and took them to Brixen.
***************

1535 Community driven from Auspitz
Not much later, at night on St. Andrew's Eve (November 29), 1535,
God allowed dear brother Jakob Hutter to be arrested. He was deceived
and betrayed at Klausen on the Eisack River in the Adige region. His
captors tied a gag in his mouth and brought him to Innsbruck, the seat of

King Ferdinand's government. They tortured him and caused him great
agony by all they did to him, yet they were not able to change his heart or
make him deny the truth. Even when they tried to prove him wrong with
the Scripture, they could not stand up to him and were put to shame. Full
of hatred and revenge, the priests imagined they would drive the devil out
of him. They put him in ice cold water and then took him into a very hot
room and had him beaten with rods.
They lacerated his body, poured brandy into the wounds, and set it on
fire. They bound him hand and foot and again gagged him to prevent him
from denouncing their wickedness. Putting a hat with a tuft of feathers on
his head, they took him into the house of their idols, knowing how he
would abhor this, and in every way made a laughingstock of him. After he
had suffered all their cruelty and yet remained firm and upright, a
Christian hero steadfast in faith, these wicked sons of Caiaphas and Pilate
sentenced him to be burned alive.
As he was being led to the stake, Jakob Hutter said to his
executioners, Come here, those of you who would prove me wrong! Let us
test our faith in the fire. This fire will harm my soul as little as the fiery
furnace harmed Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. A huge crowd was
present and saw his steadfast witness. His execution took place about the
time of Candlemas (February 2), on the Friday before the first week of
Lent, 1536.
Jakob Hutter was a man of blameless heart before God, and endured
the ordeal by fire. A faithful servant of Jesus Christ, he had led the church
and brought God's Word to his people for nearly three years, and had left
behind him in Moravia a people gathered and built up for the Lord. It is
because of Jakob Hutter that the church community became known as the
Hutterian Brethren. To this day the church is not ashamed of the name. The
letters and writings he left us amply confirm that he was filled with zeal,
earnest and courageous in the strength of God, and wholehearted in his
love to the divine truth which he upheld until death. Indeed, he gave his
life for it. This has been the fate of all Christ's apostles in our world.
When Jakob Hutter was captured, the brothers in Tirol immediately
sent word to Hans Amon and the church at Auspitz in Moravia.

***************

1536 Jakob Hutter arrested
In the first days of 1536, the church sent brothers to Tirol:
Hieronymus Kals of Kufstein, schoolmaster of the church community of
God, and with him Michel Seifensieder from Wallern in Bohemia, and
Hans Oberecker from the Adige Valley. They reached Vienna in Austria,
but already on January 8 they were taken prisoner. When these valiant
knights and lovers of God had remained steadfast no matter what was done
to them, they were condemned to death and burned to ashes in Vienna on
the Friday before Passion Sunday, in Lent, 1536.
It was Hieronymus Kals who wrote the prayers for the schoolchildren,
which are still used in our schools today. He also wrote a letter from prison
to the children in the school. This letter is still preserved as are two or
three songs he made and other letters he wrote from prison to the
community.
At the time just described, some carpenters and miners found both
work and housing at Bohmisch Krumau and in the mines at Brimsitz; they
also lived at the gold mine at Heroltitz half a mile outside Tischlawitz.
Their steward was Onophrius Griesinger. At Easter 1536 Hans Amon and
the elders who assisted him, summoned the people from Bohmisch
Krumau, Brimsitz, Heroltitz, and wherever they were living up and down
the country. They gathered the church in the pine forest between
Nikolsburg and Pulgram and celebrated the blessed meal of remembrance
of the Lord Jesus Christ in great joy.
The local magistrates discovered them there and ordered them to
leave the property. So after their meeting they commended themselves to
God's care and returned to the places they had come from, joyfully
praising God.
At that time God provided his people with more places to live. He
moved the hearts of the population to have compassion for them and give

them shelter. From a nobleman called Sturtzhauser, the elders in Austria
secured a house at Drasenhofen, just outside Steinebrunn. *
There they once more built up Christian community. Now for an
appointed time King Ferdinand had to tolerate in his inherited territory
what he had been unwilling to tolerate in Moravia. This should be
recognized as an act of God and no small one, either. Groups of believers
started gathering also in the town of Kostel and at Rohrbach near Gross
Seelowitz in Moravia. ** The members of Christ's church met eagerly
with great joy and courage. Filled with love to God they came by day and
night, walking several miles through wind, rain, snow, and mud to hear the
Word of the Lord. Each cared for the other in a brotherly, Christian way,
with warmth and tenderness, ready to serve each other in love. They had to
make do with small, cramped dwellings, all moving closer together and
putting up with many shortages and worries. Yet they wholeheartedly
thanked and praised God for it all and were kind and patient, as befits the
saints.
In all their places the children were brought together and entrusted to
God-fearing sisters, who conscientiously took care of them and led them
to the Lord through Christian discipline. And so the faithful continually
praised God, who had provided dwelling places for them.
***************

1537 Georg Fasser couldn't read, but preached Gospel
In 1537 Georg Fasser, a servant of the church of God, was sent to
Poggstall in Austria. * He did not know his letters and could not read but
he preached the Gospel with power and spiritual authority. He was
captured in Austria, cruelly tortured, and finally executed with the sword.
But those whom he had taught and gathered set out and traveled to the
church of God.
In this same year, brothers Bastel Glaser and Hansel Grunfelder were
taken prisoner at Imst in the Upper Inn Valley. They were executed with

the sword and then burned.
God carried out his work in a wonderful way, and the church grew and
spread, for he desired to make his glorious work manifest to everyone, to
comfort and uplift his people, and to save many. So he provided his people
with shelter and housing in several places, notably in Austria, where Lord
Hans Fünfkirchen allowed them to settle at Steinebrunn. The believers
received this from God with thanksgiving. They bought houses and altered
them to make them suitable for their way of living. They also began to live
at Poppitz. **
Toward winter of that year, Onophrius Griesinger returned from Tirol
to the church of God in Austria arid Moravia (after sending many devout
brothers and sisters ahead of him) in order to support and comfort the
believers with his ministry.
***************

1538 Onophrius Griesinger, Leonhard Lochmaier executed
In 1538, brother Peter Ridemann, a servant of the Word, was sent by
the church of God to visit the scattered Philippites in Upper Austria. When
they accepted his message he restored brotherhood among them, appointed
elders in the various places, set in order what was necessary, and then
returned to the church at Steinebrunn.
In the spring of 1538 the assembly of God's children felt the Lord's
leading to send Onophrius Griesinger and Leonhard Lochmaier, both
servants of divine truth and preachers of the Gospel of Christ, to Tirol to
gather the chosen of the Lord. The saints took leave of them by interceding
for them and commending them to God's mercy. They then left for Tirol,
where they carried out their ministry with the utmost dedication, in
constant danger of persecution. They helped many to find eternal joy and
salvation and, after a fitting farewell sent them to the church community
of God.

Both brothers, however, were captured and taken to Brixen. After
enduring terrible torture, they were condemned to death. Onophrius was
burned alive at Brixen; a few days later Leonhard Lochmaier was
beheaded.
Around this time, brother Michel Beck was captured, beheaded, and
then burned at Reutte in the Allgau.
In this year 1538 the church set up households in several places, two
at Schakwitz, and at Austerlitz, Pausram, and Pulgram.
In this year, brother Hans Wucherer and Bartel Sinbeck were burned
at Burghausen for the sake of their faith.
Martin from Vilgraten and Kaspar Schuster were executed with the
sword in the Puster Valley.
Also this year, a Philippite servant of the Word named Hans Gentner
and some others united with us.
This same year, Hans Seidel and Hans Donner were executed with the
sword at St. Veit in Carinthia.
***************

1539 Brothers sent out on the Lord's Work
In 1539, the brotherhood considered before God and agreed to send
Peter Ridemann, a servant of the Lord and of his church, to Württemberg
and Hesse to gather much fruit for God. There was a blessing on the
journey, for many of the Swiss Brethren united with our church.
Toward spring of the same year, the brotherhood decided to send
Christoph Gschäl to visit the church in Upper Austria and then go back to
Styria and Carinthia. It was also unanimously decided by the church that
Leonhard Lanzenstiel or Seiler should be appointed to the service of the

Gospel. He was confirmed in this service by the elders with the laying on
of hands and was sent to Tirol where he brought blessing and salvation to
many souls.
Soon afterward, the brotherhood asked Hans Gentner to go to
Württemberg, to visit the group that had sent him earlier to the church
community. Fervent prayer was made to God as he started on his journey.
He carried out his task with joy and in the fear of God and helped many to
find salvation.
When Leonhard Lanzenstiel or Seiler had visited as many Godfearing people as possible in Tirol and had worked hard to gather the
saints for the Lord, he returned joyfully in the fall to the church
community, bringing with him a number who had surrendered their lives
to God.
But Leonhard's wife, Apollonia, was arrested and taken to Brixen.
Because she held steadfastly to faith in Christ and refused to recant, she
was drowned for the sake of divine truth.
A little later, around Martinmas [Nov. 11], Christoph Gschal and his
companions traveled from Carinthia and Styria back to God's church
community.
***************

1539 Troubles at Steinebrunn
In the week after St. Nicholas Day [Dec. 6], Peter Ridemann returned
from Hesse to Steinebrunn in Austria, not knowing the provost had carried
off the brothers. He found only heartbroken sisters and children left. Hans
Gentner also came back from Wurttemberg into this overwhelming
distress in God's church community. An account of this time of tribulation
and its causes is given below.

When God wished to increase his glory and the welfare of the
believers, he put those who had joined together in his name to a rigorous
trial, just as gold is tried in the flame. This was to test what was in their
hearts so that the steadfastness of their faith would be visible in them as
God's children. At the same time the malice of the old serpent showed up
in his false prophets, who beset the Roman King Ferdinand (in the same
way that Satan beset Job), filling his ears with unjust accusations against
the church of God. They goaded him until he finally did as they wanted
and dispatched his marshal from Vienna with the provost and some
mounted attendants, who arrived without warning at Falkenstein. *
Taking a reckless mob with them, they attacked the Christian
community at Steinebrunn in the late evening of December 6, 1539. They
locked all the men they could find in one room, the women and girls in
another. With terrifying uproar they posted guards for the night, while
plundering whatever they could.
During this infamous raid, the sick, the children, and the expectant
mothers were overwhelmed with terror, fearing they would be killed. The
brothers and sisters who were locked up prepared themselves to sacrifice
their lives for God and die by fire or the sword.
About 150 brothers were captured and taken under secure guard to
Falkenstein Castle.
Some time later King Ferdinand sent his marshal and several scholars
and priests to them, as well as the executioner as their high priest and
assistant. They used the Christmas days (a thing rarely done anywhere) to
begin their malicious treatment of the captive witnesses for the truth.
Some they questioned under torture regarding their basic beliefs and hopes
and where they kept their treasures. The believers confessed unanimously
that Christ the Savior was their only hope and dearest treasure, in whom
they had attained the Father's mercy.
Their tormentors questioned them about numerous points with the
intention of teaching and converting them. They especially stressed the
Eucharist, praising it highly. The brothers answered that it was a dumb
idol. After hearing this and many other statements of faith, the royal

emissaries returned to Vienna. The brothers remained imprisoned in
Falkenstein Castle.
***************

1540 Falkeinstein Prisoners
In 1540 the royal marshal came to Falkenstein, driven in a one-horse
carriage. The provost and other armed riders accompanied him. They
questioned the imprisoned brothers one by one. All who refused to agree
with them and held firm to the truth were bound in pairs with iron fetters,
their hands chained together.
When the brothers were to be led away to the sea, many sisters in the
faith came to the castle. Some of them were wives of the brothers, others
were friends and relatives. They knelt down together and prayed fervently
to their Father the most high God, for protection from all sin and evil on
land or sea, and for steadfast hearts that remained faithful to the truth until
death.
After they had prayed, the marshal's driver, Lang Hans (Tall Hans),
gave orders for everyone to make ready for departure. They took leave
with many bitter tears, encouraging one another to hold firm to the Lord
and to the truth they had recognized. Each one commended the other to
God's merciful protection, not knowing if any would ever see the other
again on this earth.
Let each reader judge for himself what a hard struggle that was for
husbands to be parted from their wives and for fathers to leave their little
children behind. In truth, flesh and blood cannot do it. God will seek out
those who cause such great distress and punish them severely.
The leave-taking was such a pitiful sight that the royal marshal and
some of his men were unable to hold back their tears.

When things were ready and the escort had arrived, the believers were
marched through the gate two by two, firmly trusting that God would
protect and help them. Ninety set out after being imprisoned for six and a
half weeks. The sisters had to stay behind in the castle. They climbed on
the wall and, heartbroken with grief, gazed after their brothers, to whom
they were bound by divine love, until they could see them no longer. Then
they were sent away from the castle to return home.
Those brothers who were not taken to the sea because they were weak
or sick or too young were held in the castle. Several of the young boys
were given into the possession of Austrian noblemen, but nearly all of
them returned to the church. The other brothers remained in Falkenstein
Castle until God in his mercy led them out.
On that occasion the lord, Hans Fünfkirchen, vowed he would place
an inscription above the castle gate, stating that since it was built, there
had never been so many devout people in it as at that time; but it can only
be supposed he forgot to do this. In spite of himself he had had to witness
to the truth.
This great distress came upon the faithful because they testified
against pope and priests, against their sinful lives and the whole idolatrous
system, saying that God will punish them severely for their abominations
and let them die in their sins. That is why King Ferdinand had empowered
the bloodthirsty mob of priests to do as they pleased with the prisoners.
The priests were quick in deciding that the brothers deserved to die, that
they could not be tolerated on land but should be sent to sea to waste away
in great suffering, rowing as galley slaves. They were to be handed over to
the high admiral Andrea Doria for use in his fleet of warships that fought
and plundered the Turks and other enemies.
Although the brothers told the king's agents that they would not row a
stroke to aid war and pillage, it made no difference.
The king's men received strict instructions that the prisoners be
marched under guard from one courthouse to the next.

So these witnesses to the truth were brought before the magistrates in
towns and villages, and were escorted first from Falkenstein Castle to
Vienna, then to Neustadt, Schottwien, and over the Semmering to Bruck on
the Mur and down to Bairisch Graz, to Leibnitz and Marburg (Maribor)
and so to Cilli (Celje), then to Stein (Kamnik), in Carniola, over the Sava
River to Laibach (Ljubliana), on to Upper Laibach and finally to Trieste.
All this time, the brothers endured great hunger and hardship; they
were fed with the bread of fear and the waters of distress.
But even in times of greatest distress, God is thinking of what is best
for his own people and never forgets them. He gave several of the
prisoners inner premonitions of hope and trust that he would show them a
way out.
And so on the twelfth night in Trieste, he helped them out of prison.
They tied together the ropes used to bind them on the march and let
themselves down the wall on the side towards the sea. He showed the
brothers a place to escape right next to the sentry box on the wall.
When all of them, sick and healthy, were over the wall, they knelt
down to praise and thank God. The Lord also prepared the way for most of
them to return to the church of the saints in Moravia, their hearts filled
with joy and peace.
Twelve of them, however, were seized in the merciless pursuit that
followed. They were handed over to Andrea Doria, the emperor's admiral
for naval warfare, and taken to the galleys with the intention of using them
at the oars. But the faithful were determined to risk their lives, to be
flogged rather than to set their hands to rowing. It is not known exactly
how each one met his end, but if they remained faithful to the Lord it is
certain that they did not have many good days left.
The brothers whom God had delivered returned to the church in
Moravia on the fourth Sunday of Lent in 1540. They were welcomed with
great joy and thanksgiving as a gift from God.

The church community had previously been forced to leave
Schakwitz, but in this year 1540 they received permission from the lord
marshal of Mahrisch Kromau to start building again and to gather the
believers there. Two houses also came into our possession at that time
when people from Schakwitz became our brothers. Later we were given
legal possession of several other houses.
To build up the house of God with his chosen, God gave his ministers
the courage and eagerness to send brothers out in various directions.
Through the witness given during the trouble at Steinebrunn, burning zeal
for the truth arose and drew people to the believers, who bore the cross as
a sign of victory on their bloodstained banner. It was the same as with
Pharaoh, who, in ordering all boys to be killed at birth, had hoped to
weaken the people of Israel: God circumvented his designs, and the
Israelites increased until the land swarmed with their children. Similarly,
King Ferdinand's intention of wiping out the people of God by sending
every male to the galleys served only to increase their numbers.
In this year 1540, the assembly of the Lord also sent brothers out on
mission journeys. Leonhard Lanzenstiel or Seiler was sent again to Tirol,
Christoph Gschal again to Styria and Carinthia, and Peter Ridemann to
Hesse. Hans Gentner was sent to Lower Swabia and Wurttemberg. From
all these places God led many people to his church, which spread widely
throughout Moravia.
In this year 1540, brother Hans Zimmerauer was put in prison at
Schwaz in the Inn Valley for the sake of divine truth. As his captors could
not make him recant, they executed him with the sword.
***************

1541 Peter Riedemann writes Confession of Faith during
imprisonment

In 1541 the church, after seeking the Lord's guidance, decided that
Hans Gentner, a loyal servant of Jesus Christ, should go once more to
Hesse and Wurttemberg. In the same way, the church took leave of
Christoph Gschäl with the commission first to visit the believers in Upper
Austria and then to go on to the Salzburg region and to Carinthia.
As the church had few shepherds and ministers at the time, Christoph
Gschäl was instructed to tell the church in Upper Austria that all who did
not have a God-given reason to remain there should move to the church
community in Moravia. Some then went to the church community, but the
larger number remained behind.
During this time, Peter Ridemann was imprisoned at Wolkersdorf in
Hesse, from where he sent a letter to the church about what is due to
servants of the Word. While in prison he also wrote our Confession of
Faith, which is still in print.
In 1541 around St. James' Day [July 25], the plague broke out in
Moravia and lasted throughout the winter into the year 1542, and God
visited his people with the same sickness. Quite a number of the believers
were taken to their last resting place.
***************

1542 Hans Amon dies, Lanzenstiel appointed Elder
At Candlemas [Feb. 2] in 1542 the Lord released dear brother Hans
Amon from this world through the same plague. The entire church
community had been entrusted to him. For six years he had tended it with
God's Word and guided it in utmost faithfulness through God's grace. He
had a good testimony from all believers and from unbelievers, too, for
God's blessing was abundantly visible in his work, as can be felt in the
letters he wrote to those in prison and to the church communities. We still
have many of these letters as well as some of his songs. And so the whole
church suffered deep grief and loss, now that they had to do without him.
But God, who comforts his people in all need and does not leave them

without a leader, once again provided them with a faithful shepherd gifted
with burning zeal. This was Leonhard Lanzenstiel, a rope maker by trade
and a servant of God's Word, who accepted the care of the church because
of its great need. Hans Gentner loyally assisted him.
The two brothers at once sent word to Peter Ridemann in prison at
Wolkersdorf in Hesse. God had eased his imprisonment and had in some
ways opened a door for him, and the church needed him badly, because
God had called Hans Amon into eternity. It was therefore the conviction
and advice of the elders and the whole church that he and his fellow
prisoner should return as soon as possible if they could leave with a good
conscience.
When his arrival was delayed more and more, Leonhard Lanzenstiel
and Hans Gentner called together the elders of the church and told them of
the pressing need to provide the church with elders. After persevering in
fervent prayer to God, the whole church unanimously appointed five
brothers to a time of testing in the service of the Gospel. Their names were
Peter Walpot, Kaspar Seidelman, Michel Matschidel, Jakob Kircher, and
Simon Waindel.
In the same way, five brothers were appointed to the service of
stewardship. Their names were Andreas Stuck, Peter Hagen, Klaus
Dreytzel, Paul Zimmermann, and Christian Stockel. The church
community rejoiced about these brothers and accepted them with deep
gratitude as a gift from God.
Following these serious meetings Peter Ridemann arrived from
prison in Hesse, and the church was once again full of joy and lifted above
her troubles. Just a few days later, all the elders of the church gathered and
decided unanimously that the brothers Leonhard Lanzenstiel and Peter
Ridemann should together care for the church, which they did with true
dedication. The Lord granted his blessing, the church grew, and the
number of believers increased daily.
God's messengers and witnesses gave steadfast testimony in word and
deed, speaking powerfully of God's kingdom. They urged people to change
their lives, to repent and turn away from this world's sin, blasphemy, and

injustice, and to dedicate themselves to the living God, their Creator, and
Jesus Christ, their Redeemer. God blessed them and gave them joy in
doing his work.
This, however, was always at the price of great suffering and the
shedding of much blood in many lands, towns, and marketplaces, for a
testimony to faith in Jesus Christ and for the sake of his divine truth. On
the following pages an attempt is made to tabulate all the martyrs that can
be recalled for certain, though not all are known. We are not concerned
with the exact total, which certainly was higher. Our concern is to show
how, through the blood of martyrs, faith and divine truth were revealed by
God in every corner of the German lands.
***************

Table of Martyrs
BOHEMIA Prague 11
HUNGARY Kirschlag 3
HUNGARY Loren 3
HUNGARY Nusel 2
MORAVIA Brünn 4
MORAVIA Znaim 7
MORAVIA Olmütz 4
LOWER AUSTRIA Vienna 23
LOWER AUSTRIA and many executed secretly
LOWER AUSTRIA Neustadt 2

LOWER AUSTRIA Kreuzenstein 6
LOWER AUSTRIA Melk 3
LOWER AUSTRIA Grein 1
LOWER AUSTRIA Lembach 45
LOWER AUSTRIA Mödling 4
LOWER AUSTRIA Pöggstall 1
LOWER AUSTRIA Ybbs 1
LOWER AUSTRIA Krems 3
LOWER AUSTRIA Böheimkirchen 2
LOWER AUSTRIA Ottenthal 4
LOWER AUSTRIA Pottenhofen 4
LOWER AUSTRIA Feldsberg 1
LOWER AUSTRIA Falkenstein 5
UPPER AUSTRIA Mauthausen 1
UPPER AUSTRIA Gmünden 2
UPPER AUSTRIA Enns 1
UPPER AUSTRIA Kropfing 2
UPPER AUSTRIA Steyr 30
UPPER AUSTRIA Wels 10
UPPER AUSTRIA Fesselsbruck 4

UPPER AUSTRIA Gramastetten 3
UPPER AUSTRIA Freistadt 10
UPPER AUSTRIA Falkendorf 1
UPPER AUSTRIA Vöcklabruck 8
UPPER AUSTRIA Weissenburg 2
UPPER AUSTRIA Linz 72
BAVARIA Münich 9
BAVARIA Rosenheim 1
BAVARIA [Bad] Aibling 3
BAVARIA Wasserburg 1
BAVARIA Mühldorf 5
BAVARIA Altötting 7
BAVARIA Landshut 5
BAVARIA Lambach 22
BAVARIA Burghausen 7
BAVARIA Riedt 4
BAVARIA Schärding 3
BAVARIA Passau 2
BAVARIA Vilshofen 1
BAVARIA Mermos 1

BAVARIA Ingolstadt 2
BAVARIA Nüneburg 9
BAVARIA Neuberg 3
BAVARIA Freyburg 2
BAVARIA Julbach near Branau 1
STYRIA Graz 7
STYRIA Bruck an der Mur 12
STYRIA Unzmarkt 1
STYRIA Griesbach 5
CARINTHIA St. Veit 7
CARINTHIA Kematen 3
CARINTHIA Göpingen 5
CARINTHIA Wolfsberg in the Lavant Valley 3
PUSTERTAL Sillian 3
PUSTERTAL Taufers 1
PUSTERTAL St. Lorenzen 11
PUSTERTAL Kiens 5
PUSTERTAL Schöneck 4
PUSTERTAL Michelsburg 24
ADIGE REGION Brixen 16

ADIGE REGION Klausen 7
ADIGE REGION Kaltern 4
ADIGE REGION Kuntersweg 9
ADIGE REGION Bozen 11
ADIGE REGION Neumarkt 9
ADIGE REGION Terlan 3
ADIGE REGION Sterzing 30
ADIGE REGION Gufidaun 19
ADIGE REGION Rodeneck 4
ADIGE REGION Schlanders 2
ADIGE REGION Trient 1
SALZBURG REGION Salzburg 38
SALZBURG REGION Tittmoning 4
SALZBURG REGION Berchtesgaden 18
SALZBURG REGION Marklibat 2
SALZBURG REGION Kuchl in the Kuchl Valley 3
SALZBURG REGION Abtenau 1
INN VALLEY Kufstein 16
INN VALLEY Rattenburg 71
INN VALLEY Schwaz 20

INN VALLEY Hall (Solbad Hall) 2
INN VALLEY Innsbruck 8
INN VALLEY Landeck 1
INN VALLEY Steinach 4
INN VALLEY Kitzbühel 68
INN VALLEY Stams 3
INN VALLEY Petersberg 2
INN VALLEY Imst 8
INN VALLEY Rotholz 1
FRANCONIA Ansbach 1
FRANCONIA Bamberg 3
FRANCONIA Kitzingen 20
FRANCONIA [Bad] Frankenhausen 1
FRANCONIA Fehelsbruck 3
FRANCONIA Würzburg 10
SWABIA Augsburg 2
SWABIA Landsberg 19
SWABIA Lauingen 2
SWABIA Dillingen 2
SWABIA Höchstädt 2

SWABIA Weissenhorn 1
SWABIA Zusmarshausen 8
SWABIA Nördlingen 1
SWABIA Schwabisch Gmünd 7
SWABIA Günzburg 6
SWABIA Mantelhof 20
SWABIA Kaufbeuren 5
SWABIA Sonthofen 1
SWABIA Warthausen 1
SWABIA Reutte 1
WÜRTTEMBERG Urach 1
WÜRTTEMBERG Esslingen 3
WÜRTTEMBERG Schorndorf 1
WÜRTTEMBERG Tübingen 5
WÜRTTEMBERG Weil 2
WÜRTTEMBERG Stuttgart 2
WÜRTTEMBERG Rottenburg on the Neckar 13
WÜRTTEMBERG Rothenburg on the Tauber 24
WÜRTTEMBERG Herrenberg 12
WÜRTTEMBERG Schlüsselfeld 1

WÜRTTEMBERG Stätz 18
WÜRTTEMBERG Deutschnofen (Tirol) 1
WÜRTTEMBERG Ulmerfeld 2
WÜRTTEMBERG Waldshut 5
WÜRTTEMBERG Wilhelmsbruck 1
WÜRTTEMBERG Weiden 3
WÜRTTEMBERG Königsberg 3
WÜRTTEMBERG Kürchen on the Eck 1
WÜRTTEMBERG Illingen 10
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN Baden-Baden 20
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN Pforzheim 2
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN Prethaim 9
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN Bühl 2
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN Bruchsal 1
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN [Karlsruher] Durlach 12
MARGRAVATE OF BADEN Gernsbach 1
COUNT PALATINE responsible for executing 30
ON RHINE Speyer 1
ON RHINE Pühelsberg 1
ON RHINE Kislach 1

NETHERLANDS Aurea 1
NETHERLANDS Andorf 5
NETHERLANDS Lagrentzen 1
NETHERLANDS Brussels 2
NETHERLANDS Aachen 5
VELSCHLAND Fuld 18
ALSACE Ensisheim 600
ALSACE Mühlhausen 17
SWITZERLAND Zurich 16
SWITZERLAND Basel 3
SWITZERLAND Bern 1
SWITZERLAND Schwyz 3
SWITZERLAND Appenzell 1
SWITZERLAND Constance on Lake Constance 3
SWITZERLAND Waldsee (in Swabia) 11
SWITZERLAND Ettach 1
SWITZERLAND Baden 1
ITALY Venice 3
ITALY Lavarone (near Trento) 3
ITALY Lechensteg 4 ,

***************

1542 Martyrs tortures
These confessors of the faith - so many that they become like a new
cloud of witnesses surrounding us, like a fiery pillar going before us in the
night - these Christians, valiant for the truth of God, were condemned to
torture and death in ways too numerous to describe. There were men and
women, youths and girls, old and young, teachers and listeners. In them we
see that God pours out his grace and strength in recent times as well as in
days gone by. Some were racked and stretched until the sun could have
shone through them. Some were torn apart and died under the torture.
Some were burned to ashes as heretics. Some were roasted on pillars.
Some were torn with red-hot tongs. Some were locked into houses and
burned together. Some were hanged on trees. Some were executed with the
sword, strangled, or cut to pieces. Many had their mouths gagged and their
tongues fastened so they could not speak or defend their faith, and in that
state they were taken to their deaths. They were taken in droves like lambs
to be slaughtered and murdered, as is pleasing to the devil. Some of the
women were pushed into water, pulled out again, and asked if they would
recant. When they remained steadfast, they were drowned. In these violent
ways Satan worked through his children.
Those who escaped all this were hunted and driven from place to
place and from land to land. They had to be like owls and night herons, not
daring to appear by day, hiding among crags and crevices in the rocks, in
wild woods, and in pits and holes in the earth. They were hunted by
constables and dogs; snares were set to capture them like birds.
Everywhere, evil and completely false stories were spread against
them: among others, that they had cloven hooves like goats or oxen; that
they gave a drink from a little bottle and so made people imitate them;
that they had their women in common and lived disorderly lives; that they
killed children and ate them. They were called rebaptizers, seducers,
sectarians, gangsters, fanatics, and other vile names.

From every quarter, emperor, kings, and princes issued mandates
forbidding any toleration whatsoever: the Anabaptists were to be rooted
out and destroyed, and no one should shelter them.
An account follows of what took place in the church during the
terrible five-year period of distress.
In 1542 brother Hans Huber was imprisoned at Wasserburg, Bavaria,
which is governed by Count von Otting. Despite many different attempts
to make him deny his faith, he remained unshaken and each time gave the
same testimony: the beliefs to which he held were soundly based on divine
truth and were the pure, genuine faith in Jesus Christ our Savior. He was
therefore condemned to death, taken to the place of execution, and burned
alive.
***************

1543 Concerning the incarnation of Christ
In 1543 there was dissension about Christ's incarnation. This is how
it happened: Hans Gentner, a servant of the Word, was sent to
Württemberg, and brother Michel Kramer, a steward, was sent as his
assistant. In Wurttemberg was a little group who called themselves
brothers, led by a certain Jörg Norlinger. *
Their belief about the incarnation was that Christ brought his flesh
from heaven. They held that if he had received his flesh in Mary, it was not
a virgin birth.
These people wanted so much to unite with Hans Gentner and our
brothers that Hans accepted them while he was still out on mission.
Although he and Michel Kramer knew to some extent of their wrong belief
about the incarnation of Christ, they let them continue in it because they
were united on other articles of faith. They thought that when the group
came to the church community, they would be convinced on this point, too,
give up their own view, and accept the church's belief.

When they came to the community, however, they held to their own
opinion, even spreading it to some of the members. As soon as the
servants of the Word learned of it, they challenged them about their false
idea. It was certainly not what the church believed, nor was it in
accordance with the truth and Christian faith, which states THAT CHRIST
WAS CONCEIVED BY THE HOLY SPIRIT, BORN OF THE VIRGIN
MARY. Christ was not conceived through a man by natural union, nor was
Christ's mother stained like other women, who lose their virginity when
they conceive a child. She was a virgin mother, a virgin before and after
the birth.
When Adam's wife was taken from his side, when the barren gave
birth, when women bore children in their old age - all this was a
preparation to make it more believable that a virgin might bear, and did
bear, a child. This miraculous conception and birth was foretold by the
prophet, who said, God will give you a sign; behold, a virgin is great with
child; she shall conceive and bear a son. This would not have been a sign if
he had been conceived in the normal way with the participation of a man,
and she would not have been a maiden or virgin.
When the angel greeted Mary and told her she was to be a mother, she
asked how it might come about, since she did not know a man. She would
have had no need to ask this question if she had not known herself to be an
untouched virgin. But the angel replied, The Holy Spirit will come upon
you; the power of the Most High will overshadow you; and the holy child
to be born of you will be called the Son of God. It does not say from the
seed of Joseph but from the Holy Spirit and the power of the Most High.
These were the master workers in the pure and hallowed body of Mary. It
follows that her pure flesh and blood was the human seed from which God
and the Holy Spirit formed the noble and pure body of Christ. Because she
was great with child before they lived together, Joseph planned to leave
her quietly, but the angel appeared to him and said, The child that is born
in her is of the Holy Spirit.
Accordingly, the Scriptures speak only of a woman and call him seed
of a woman. Paul speaks in the same way, saying, God's own Son, born of

a woman. Other children are born of man and woman but here the
Scriptures tell only of a woman, not meaning a wife who knows a husband.
This is the promise made to Abraham: In your seed shall all nations
be blessed; for Mary, according to the flesh, is a descendant of Abraham
and David, and Christ comes from Mary according to the flesh, so he is
himself of the seed of Abraham. On her father's side Mary comes from the
tribe of Judah, on her mother's from the tribe of Levi, and so John the
Baptist's mother Elizabeth was her cousin, her relative. The Virgin Mary,
on her father's side, was of the same family as Joseph, her partner in
marriage, and so the evangelists make the table of descent lead to him.
In becoming man, Christ is the fruit of Mary alone (that is, of a
woman and not of a man), born in a supernatural way. Here a new Adam
had to be born in a new way, without spot of sin, because he was to take
away the taint of the sinful birth of the old Adam, tread the serpent's head
underfoot, and overcome death and hell. If he had been born in sin, the
devil would have had power over him as he has over the children of wrath.
But the devil, the prince of this world, had no hold over him.
When he said, I am not of this world (from which some would have it
that he received his flesh from heaven), he did not mean that he did not
take his flesh from the Virgin Mary. He meant that he had nothing to do
with the evil of the world and the sinfulness of the flesh. Further on he
said that the disciples were not of this world, but in spite of this they had
flesh. And how could he be Abraham's seed if he had brought his flesh
from heaven?
Now when the servants of the Word spoke to this Nörlinger and his
followers about their false belief, he asserted that Hans Gentner must have
taken the same position in Württemberg, as he had not contradicted them.
Since they were unwilling to give up their opinion and accept what they
were taught, Norlinger and those who agreed with him were excluded, and
twelve or more left with him. Every effort was made to find out who was
similarly infected so that such false belief could be rooted out from the
church.

Leonhard Seiler and Peter Ridemann, servants of the Lord and his
church, with their assistants in the service of the Word, immediately
prepared a letter admonishing and correcting Hans Gentner and Michel
Kramer on this point and instructing them to return to the church without
delay. It was taken to Wurttemberg by another minister, Hans Klopfer of
Feuerbach, who had united with the church not long before. When Hans
Gentner and Michel Kramer arrived, it became clear that not only had they
left Jörg Nörlinger and his group in their wrong belief without trying to
change it, but they had even accepted them and sent them to the church
community, where they had misled other members. Hans Gentner
confessed his mistake and laid down his service of the Word. Later, when
his ministry was recognized again, he was reappointed and continued
faithful for the rest of his life.
Nor did Michel Kramer remain without discipline, for he was actually
the more guilty of the two, having persuaded Hans to ignore the matter,
which Hans should not have done.
***************

1544 Hans Mändel & Jörg Liebich imprisoned & released
In 1544 brother Hans Mändel was imprisoned for the sake of divine
truth at Landeck in the upper Inn Valley for twenty-two weeks. There he
was cruelly tortured to make him recant. But he remained steadfast. Then
he flattened the iron fetters around his ankles by hammering them with
two stones and slid his feet out. He knotted together the ropes that had
been used to lower his food to him as well as to torture him, and he let
himself down from the top of the tower. So he was free, with his heart and
conscience at peace.
As a youth some years earlier, he had been imprisoned for twenty-six
weeks at Sterzing and had been severely beaten with rods. One day when
the jailer had not locked the prison door properly but had left it partly

open, he slipped away secretly. So by God's intervention he managed to
escape both times.
During this year 1544, brother Jörg Liebich was imprisoned at the
Vellenburg near Innsbruck for the sake of divine truth. He had to endure
much in a horrible dungeon where the devil persistently tempted him in
visible form. This is described in the stories of the martyrs.
A young sister, also imprisoned for her faith, was put next to Liebich
in the prison, chained to his feet, and the two were left together for a long
time. But they feared God and did not give way to temptation. Both were
released and returned to the church community.
***************

1545 Bärtel Riedmair with group of 300 unite with the
Church
On January 16, 1545, Bärtel Riedmair, Fabian Fitz, Martin Voyt, and
Jakob Heusler talked with our brothers and united with us after
considering before God a number of points of faith: baptism, community
of goods, Marriage, and the right attitude to governing authorities, priests,
and false brothers.
After the uniting had taken place, Hans Gentner as minister and
brother Jörg Liebich were sent with the four other brothers to their three
hundred people in Silesia to bring them the good news of the uniting. *
Brother Bärtel Riedmair, their minister, remained with us for a time
to experience the Lord's work in our households. Early in the spring, the
Lord's Meal of Remembrance was held at Butschowitz. Bärtel stayed to
take part and afterward traveled to Silesia. Then all three hundred of his
people joined us in the unity of the Spirit and came to the church
community here. There was great joy on both sides. This moved many
other people in Silesia to follow the truth with great enthusiasm.

Bärtel Riedmair and his people had belonged to the Gabrielite and
Philippite groups which had split away from Jakob Hutter and his church
community in 1533, as described earlier in this book. Since the church
community in Moravia was noticeably increased by this uniting, the
brotherhood had to obtain more houses for accommodation. In that same
year 1545, we purchased houses in twelve different places: Altenmarkt,
Bisenz, Bilowitz, Boretitz, Eibenschitz, Gobschitz, Göding, Lundenburg,
Napajedl, Pawlowitz, Rakschitz, and Tscheikowitz.
In that same year 1545, brother Oswald [Glait] was taken prisoner in
Vienna, Austria, because of his faith in the divine truth. Many attempts
were made to shake his faith. When he remained steadfast he was drowned
in the Danube at Vienna. We can learn of his valiant fight for the faith in a
song which was written about this brother and is still preserved among us?
**
In 1545, a brother named Hans Blütel was burned alive for the sake of
his faith at Ried, Bavaria. A song, well-known and still sung, tells of his
fortitude and the miracles worked through him at his death. ***
In the fall of 1545, Andreas von Villach in Carinthia plundered the
communities at Schakwitz, Pulgram, and Rampersdorf, taking especially
cattle, horses, oxen, leather, and wine, which God allowed and the
authorities condoned. He caused great damage to the church community
because his own brother Stoffel von Villach, a former army captain, had
joined the brotherhood and handed all his property over to the church.
Andreas wanted to get it back.
Up to that time, the community had been free from severe troubles
since the persecution in 1535.
The number of believers increased, with people coming from many
countries, especially from Kaufbeuren and the surrounding area. Many
joined the church, surrendering their lives to the Lord's will. More
accommodation was looked for and houses were bought at Bochtitz,
Hrubschitz, Wessely, Bohuslawitz, Tscheikowitz, Sabatisch, and Fraitz.
****

***************

1546 Imprisoned Brothers escaped because of fire
In 1546, four brothers were taken prisoner in Austria while traveling
with their wives and children to the community. They were Hans Staudach
from Kaufbeuren, Anthoni Keim, Blasius Beck and Leonhard Schneider.
They were taken to prison and left with their wives and children for four
days. During this time they were interrogated and strongly urged to
renounce their faith. As they were courageous and stood firm, they were
condemned to death and executed with the sword. Their wives were
released and came to the church community.
At this time Michel Matschidel, a servant of Jesus Christ and his
church, was taken prisoner at Ortenburg in Upper Carinthia. Two others
were captured with him, his wife Lisel and Hans Gurtzham, a shoemaker.
They were questioned in the presence of a dean and the parish priest of
Villach, who tried to argue with them. But these brothers continued to
answer until their questioners had to leave in shame.
The prisoners were put in irons, led through Styria to Vienna and
handed over to the warder at the courthouse. They were kept in prison for
almost three years. Then there was a fire in the city of Vienna. Michel and
his wife Lisel - through God's providence - were helped by a townsman to
escape from the city, and they came back to the church community.
Hans Gurtzham, however, was returned to prison for another year,
until 1550. Very early on a Friday morning, around June 27, he was
drowned in the Danube. There is a song that tells his story. *
***************

1547 More communities established

By 1547, the church community had increased in number. The Lord
was gathering his people and giving them places to settle. Communities
were established in Altenmarkt, Austerlitz, Bilowitz, Bisenz, Bochtitz,
Bohuslawitz, Boretitz, Butschowitz, Eibenschitz, Fraitz, Gobschitz,
Göding, Gurdau, Hrubschitz, Kostel, Lundenburg, Pausram, Pawlowitz,
Poppitz, Pulgram, Rakschitz near Mährisch Kromau, Rakwitz, Saitz,
Schakwitz, Tscheikowitz, Wessely, and some other places.
Satan could not stand this for long. Out of the depths of his envy he
made evil insinuations, just as he had done to Job, and said it was easy for
believers to be godly because they lived together. Since God permitted
him, he continually inflamed that viper's brood of priests, who worked on
King Ferdinand with their persistent complaints, while other ungodly folk
came to him repeatedly with lying indictments. Roused to bitter anger, the
king issued a stem mandate that his people were not to tolerate believers
in the land but were to drive all of them out on pain of losing royal favor
and incurring severe disgrace and punishment.
God had allowed the lords their lands for his good purposes and had
intended it for the believers. But since these lords ignored the brothers'
privileges, they could no longer resist either king or emperor. The former
had worked behind their backs, and at the Diet of Brünn in mid-Lent 1545
the decision had been made that unless we gave up gathering in
communities, we were to be expelled from Moravia. They said that only
five to seven persons should live in one household. Because of our beliefs,
however, we could not comply with this command. Their prohibitions
were a cunning attempt to take all the heart out of us and make us their
slaves.
***************

1547 Brotherhood was expelled from Hungary & Moravia
For a year or more, however, we were not severely persecuted. Up to
1547, when the emperor, Charles V, King Ferdinand's brother, gained

control over the kingdom, and Duke Elector Hans of Saxony [John
Frederick I] was taken prisoner, the lords still had hopes of winning
control of the kingdom. But as soon as Duke Hans was in prison, it was
Out! Out! with us.
Everywhere, the Moravian lords ordered us to leave their estates
on short notice, taking with us the young and the old, the weak and the
sick. We were not allowed to stay anywhere. We had to leave one place
after another, until we were almost at our wits' end. There was great
distress and misery wherever we went. We called upon God and asked him,
if his will was for us to remain together, to show us which way to go in our
need and to care for those who trust in him but are deserted by everyone
else.
Then the Lord in his mercy showed us a way out, for we were
accepted in Hungary (at that time this country was not well known to us),
especially by Lord Franz Niáry of Branc and we gradually moved onto his
land. We were also received by Lord Peter at Holitsch and Schossberg,
with our sick people and children and all our belongings. Communities
were established at Sabatisch, Gunowe, Holitsch, Sdräse, Protzka, Egbell,
Petersdorf, Toytsch, Senitz, Rabenska, Gätte, and Gutta. Everything had
first to be built and set up, and many wild stretches of land had to be
cleared and plowed if the believers wished to live there and house their
sick people and children. These lords were well pleased to see the work of
clearing, cutting, and building, and they were very obliging. But that did
not last long. *
As has been said, we were ordered to leave Moravia in 1548, while
Leonhard Seiler or Lanzenstiel was Elder. Under King Ferdinand, the
church of God in Moravia was severely persecuted and oppressed. The
brothers' resettlement in Hungary came to his notice, and he twice
commanded the Hungarian lords not to harbor the brothers but to expel
them from the country. These lords, fearing the king's disfavor, refused to
let the brothers stay any longer. **
***************

1548 None were spared; neither old, nor sick, nor children
Peter Bakisch in particular wreaked his fury on them; he spared no
one, neither the old nor the sick nor little children.
They were threatened and given short notice: in three days everyone
had to be gone. Anyone still found there must take the consequences.
Guards were posted to stop the believers from taking too much with them;
day and night these ungodly men did their utmost to rob the faithful of
food and anything else that took their fancy. They had no compassion.
Peter Bakisch sent peasants to cut wood, bring it in front of the
brothers' houses, and build gallows right outside their doors as if about to
hang them, especially those who did not move away fast enough. The
brothers suffered much abuse of this sort.
Their persecutors did not even wait for the allotted days to end but
used violence against the sick and old, the bent and crippled. The believers
were forced into the forest, even in the cold of wintertime, to live like wild
animals. If only they had been allowed to do this unmolested, they would
have been happy. But there was no sparing of anyone, no mercy for the old
and gray, for expectant or nursing mothers and their babies. They had to go
out into the unknown.
The treatment was so cruel that it would have been too rough for
cattle, yet these people had not harmed anyone and were innocent of any
crime. They were punished only on account of their faith and the truth of
God and because they rejected the pope's ordinances and his idolatry and
refused to worship the image of the Babylonian king.
The believers had to suffer in every way. People carried off their
possessions. They were plundered on all sides; they had to abandon houses
and farm buildings, vineyards and arable land, and whatever they had in
field or village on Bakisch's estates. Everything inside the houses was
stolen, including food and drink. No one hesitated to rob them - not a man
or woman, old person or child held back. Their one aim was to lay hands
on the believers' goods in village, field, and wood. They robbed them out

on the highway, taking not only horses, cows, and other stock, but even
their clothes.
It was on October 3, 1548, soon after Michelmas, that all the
believers were ordered out of Hungary. They had to leave their land, a
great deal of grain, wine, livestock, and tools. Yet, had it been a hundred or
even two hundred times as much, they would not have thought twice about
it and would have abandoned everything rather than forsake God and their
faith.
The children had just sat down for supper and given thanks to God for
food and drink when these ungodly men came and forced them from the
table. The food stood there until the following day. The sick had to get out
of bed or were thrown out. Such were the wrongs that were committed.
The believers begged them humbly and urgently to have some pity for the
children, just until the next day, because it was already night. But no
pleading was of any avail. The answer was, Get out! Go! Get out of the
house and leave no one behind. That is Lord Bakisch's order. They showed
no more pity for them than animals might have done. They had lost all
trace of human feeling. It hurts the name of Christ when such people call
themselves Christians.
The grown-ups, too, were just about to have their evening meal, but
their enemies would not wait for them. Through the violence and cruelty
of these godless scoundrels, the food was left standing on the stove and in
the kitchen; the bread was left in the oven; the dough in the trough. A
stone would have been moved to pity.
The cruel rabble even wanted to rob the believers of their children their own flesh and blood - guarding them so that none would be taken
away. But the brothers managed to load the little ones into two boats and
tried to get them away by water in the dark of night. They had not gone far
before the wicked crowd realized what was happening. They hurried after,
turned the boats around and brought them back to land. Then the poor
children were left sitting on the bank a long time, suffering from the wind
and the cold while their persecutors jeered at them, saying they ought to be
sweating. Such was their cruelty. The night was bitter, and the children

suffered terribly as they sat there together shivering, their teeth chattering
with cold.
Bakisch also sent hussars who went into the house, took some
brothers prisoner in front of their wives, and carried them off to the castle
at Schossberg. All that Bakisch and his people did, all their cunning, lying,
and cruelty, cannot be told. It was pitiable what suffering the believers had
to go through on account of their little children.
Leaving all their goods behind, they set out and reached the March
River by night. They crossed over by boat and camped in the woods but
they were not left in peace there either. Robbers soon arrived, going up and
down through the camp and taking anything that pleased their fancy. The
believers had to look on, helpless, for the robbers were given the freedom
of birds of the air to take what they wanted.
So the believers set out once more. They had gone just half a mile
further into the wood when the bailiff came in haste and told them to leave
at once, since his superior, Lord Veldsberger, would not have them there.
They had no place to stay and no house to live in; their lot was
distress, oppression, and violence. They were as worthless rubbish to
everybody, continually on the move without knowing where to go. They
put their hope in God alone, knowing he would help them in his own time
if they held out.
***************

1548 If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you
Lord Franz Niáry of Branc, already mentioned, also sent his captain
with strict orders in writing that, in accordance with King Ferdinand's
decree, he was to drive the brothers out of all his estates in Hungary and
Moravia. The captain called the brothers without delay, showed them the
order his lord had sent, and said there was no choice: they all had to move

out. He would help them by giving them an escort of mounted men and
foot soldiers as far as the border to safeguard them on the way.
So these set out, too, facing the same misery - old and young, adults
and children, sick and well. They, too, were given no time to get ready but
had to leave immediately and traveled as far as the March River. The first
night they camped out in the open near Strassnitz. Then the next day they
crossed the March and joined their brothers, the other group already living
in the woods a mile from Strassnitz on the Moravian border. Day and
night, for five weeks, they lived in the woods with their wives and
children, widows and orphans, the sick, the young and the old, like the
animals that live in the wild. During this time they met with much
violence and injury. Robbers stripped many of them naked, and one
brother was even murdered in the woods.
Brothers were sent abroad as far as Wallachia to see if they could find
a home, and a number of people actually moved, but word came back
saying they had found nothing. Yet they could not remain in the woods; the
bitter cold forced them to look for shelter.
Then the elders spoke comfortingly to the people and exhorted them
to hold fast to God and his truth until death, as the saints had done from
the beginning through all persecutions and hardships, for the world had
treated them in the same way. This is what Christ said: If they have
persecuted me, they will persecute you. (John 15:20) And, You must be
hated by all men for my name's sake. If anyone wants to be my follower,
let him take up his cross. (Matthew 24:9) And the apostle says, All who
desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.
(Matthew 16:24; 2 Timothy 3:12; Acts 14:22) We must go through many
troubles to reach the kingdom of God. In other words, persecution is the
true sign of the disciples of Christ and people of God. With these and
many other comforting words the elders encouraged the people to put their
trust in God.
When they could no longer maintain themselves in the woods, the
elders divided the people into little groups of ten or twelve, as many as
could find shelter in one house. Each group was entrusted to one brother,
who was to go with them and look for work; they were to find food where

they could. So they had to part from one another and scatter. That was
what caused them the greatest distress of all. If it had been God's will, they
would rather have suffered death than scatter and go without meetings and
the Word of God. But there was no other way, so they agreed and took
leave of one another, many being unable to speak for weeping. The tears
ran down their cheeks as they shook hands, blessed one another over and
over again, put themselves in God's hands, and set out, each group in a
different direction. Misery was their lot.
They returned to Moravia, from where they had been expelled. They
were in grave danger and suffered severely, fleeing as they were driven
from place to place. There was great distress and misery on account of
their sick and old people, their helpless little children, their lame and
blind. They could find no place to stay but spent one night here, one there,
always hungry and thirsty.
Some had to spend nights under hedges in the snow. They would have
been glad to be with cows and hogs in barns if only they had been allowed
there. They would have lifted their hands and thanked God. But there was
no place for them in field or village. They praised God, held to truth and
godliness, and did not lose heart.
***************

1548 Faithful were mocked by all
All winter long, they were forced to move on from one place to
another, refused house and home because the governor of Moravia had
forbidden the people to give them lodging. For King Ferdinand, incited by
the priests, continued to threaten them severely. He intimidated the
manorial lords and anyone else whose heart might otherwise have been
moved to pity for our poor, needy people. Over and above all this we had
to endure the many attempts by the world and by false brothers to make us
waver. Wherever we went we had jeers and taunts shouted at us. One said,

You wretches, who do you think you are? Do as other folk do, and then you
can stay
Another said, Your suffering is not for God's sake - it is all because
you are so stiff-necked and obstinate.
Others said, There is no sense in what you do. It is just some idea of
your own, and you have been misled.
Some abused us as hopeless heretics and scoundrels and said, It
serves them right - that is just how they should be dealt with. We have
been waiting for this for ages. They should be beheaded, hanged, or
drowned.
Some mocked when they saw us in great misery and said, Where is
your God? Why doesn't he take care of you since you are so pious? Let
him help you, let him get you out of this.
Others said, Aren't you fools? If you were in the right, wouldn't the
emperor and kings and their scholars and other educated men agree with
you? In short, on top of our hardships we had to hear every kind of taunt.
Then many grew disheartened, weakened, and beaten down, and so
they deserted God and the truth. They could not remain steadfast on the
rough path in this wilderness, but preferred enjoying the pleasures of sin
and the world to suffering evil with God's people and to bearing the shame
of Christ. These were the ones who had been shallow and lax and had not
served God in earnest while they lived in the house of the Lord during
good times. They were unable to hold out and could not disguise it. They
had to go, like chaff that cannot stay with the good wheat against the force
of the wind. Of those whose hearts were impure, who had burdened
themselves with sins, not one held out to the end. They grew faint and
weary. These weaklings let worldly happiness and the favor of the devil
win them over. Unable and unwilling to suffer for God's sake, they were
ready to incur suffering for the devil's sake. Their folly will bring them to
a horrible end.

Yet many remained steadfast and were not moved from the way of
truth, even though hardships of every shape and form put them to the test.
They were robbed and beaten countless times, stripped of their clothing,
and whatever they had was taken from them again and again. They were
not safe anywhere. People whom they had trusted to keep things locked
away for them seized what they pleased, even while the brothers were
sheltering in their houses. This period of deep distress lasted several years
without a break. Even then it did not end but grew worse, as follows.
***************

1550 All Anabaptists given notice to leave country
In 1550, a general Diet was held in Brünn in Moravia, to which King
Ferdinand himself came from Vienna with many cavalrymen. When he
heard that the brothers were still moving about the country like pilgrims,
his orders were as ruthless as before. Anyone who did not comply and
drive these people out of the country would incur serious punishment and
the displeasure of the king. Petitioning would be useless; this sect must be
driven out of all the king's lands. He gave them a short time - until St.
John the Baptist's Day [June 24] - to prepare, but then they would have to
leave.
This was proclaimed throughout the land. The following decree was
nailed to town hall doors up and down the country: All Anabaptists (the
dear brothers and sisters) are given notice to leave the country by St. John
the Baptist's Day by order of His Majesty the Holy Roman Emperor.
When the time was running out, the lords started to evict any who
were still on their estates. So the persecution gathered force, and there
were still fewer places where they could find rest or shelter. The foxes
have holes and the birds of the air have nests, but the believers had no
place at all in those days.
Now there was a wicked miller who had come to Moravia a short
while before. His wife had become a believer and joined us there. When he

saw that everyone was free to attack the brothers (for God had delivered
them into their hands), he used his wife as an excuse for stopping any
believer he met, robbing and beating him without mercy. So in him Satan
gained a useful tool.
He roamed up and down the countryside, stealing wherever he
could. He unharnessed horses from wagons, feeling sure that he would
meet no resistance. He was not afraid to vent his fury, for no one raised a
hand to help the believers. People looked on and tolerated it all. They were
so godless that they allowed the man free rein. He continued like this for a
long time, until he died.
Since the enemy now had the upper hand, people no longer tolerated
large groups of believers in the houses. They were ordered to divide up
still further and did so with great pain.
Everyone who gave them shelter put them to work for his own profit
and exploited them in all possible ways. The believers would have borne it
all thankfully, if only to find shelter for their children and their old and
sick. But it was not enough; the persecution raged on. Houses were
searched frequently to see if the believers were really out. People were
strictly forbidden to harbor them lest they themselves be taken
immediately to the lords and judges. To prevent the faithful from finding
any place at all to stay, some householders were imprisoned or fined for
sheltering them.
Many of the believers then had to stay away from houses and flee to
the woods and mountains in the cold of winter. They dug holes in the earth
to live in, like foxes. *
Hard as such conditions were, they would have endured it all
thankfully if only they had been left alone. But even there they were soon
hunted down.
***************

1550 Foxes have holes, birds have nests, but believers had no
place
At Poppitz, where believers were living in holes under ground, some
godless men built a fire at the entrance and tried to suffocate them or
smoke them out, but they were stopped and driven away. Thieving gangs
would chase believers out of thickets and woods and force them to move
on. Around the Mayberg many lived with their children in holes among the
bushes for a time. They also lived in rocky crevasses and caves in the
Mayberg cliffs and in other similar places in Moravia, wherever they
could. *
At Gätte in Hungary there were still about 250 children in one
household, as well as sick and old, lame and blind. Their brothers in other
places supplied them with food, sending them bread, in keeping with
brotherly love. But the marshal at Gätte drove the brothers back,
forbidding them to enter his estates or take anyone away by water or land.
It was proclaimed in the town square that none should have any dealings
with us. Guards were set at the town gates to prevent any brother from
entering. If a man identified himself as a brother, he had to stay out. All
shelter in house or farm was barred to him, and there was to be no mercy.
A group made camp by the waterside and put up tents, but the
marshal's men drove them away and set fire to the camp so that the
faithful would have nowhere to go. The men even destroyed their oven to
deprive them of bread as well. There was no end to fear and need for the
poor little flock. Like owls, they could not go anywhere in the daytime.
People shook their heads when they saw them. They were a laughingstock.
Everybody shouted at them, mocked them, and chased them off.
When Peter Bakisch returned from Augsburg (where he had been at
the time), he sent his hussars with the royal decree that every brother was
to get ready to leave the community at Gätte in Hungary, where a number
were still living. The king's men were coming to search the house, and so
the brothers should soon be off with young and old, or else they would be
forcibly evicted.

Once again they faced fear and heartbreak. They were stopped at
every turn. No one was allowed to give them shelter, although there were
so many sick people and children. The ungodly crowd did not wait long.
They came at night, surrounded the house, and drove old and young out
into the cold. Their cruelty, violence, and malice knew no bounds; again,
even a stone would have been moved to pity.
They dragged sick people out of bed. They shrank from nothing and
even took the clothes from a corpse. There was no end to the stealing. As
already told, they came by night, drove the brothers out, caught some who
were still in bed, chained their feet and necks with irons, and forced them
to the courthouse. They locked some in a hen house and thrust fire in to
burn them up.
They used many torturers' methods, tied the brothers' hands behind
their backs and racked them. They pulled the sisters by the hair to make
them carry the sick people and children outside, for they did not want any
left in the house by morning, or they would all be burned. The sisters
bravely refused. They said they feared God and would rather die than carry
children and sick people out of the house in such cold weather - it might
cost them their lives, and the sisters did not want to be responsible for
their deaths. Their blood would cry aloud to God.
An ungodly mob rushed in, only too eager to carry the sick and
children out into the cold. Women and men came running and searched
every corner of the house, each one keen to take away more than the next.
So there they were, out in the open. The sick suffered so badly from cold
and exposure that many died.
As if that were not enough, the mob did not leave the sick in peace
even in the open. They ran through the camp, trying to set it on fire, drew
their sabers and dealt hard blows with them, took sisters by the hair again
and tried to make them carry the sick still further. Then the pitiable little
flock of the faithful set out once again, although the night was very dark
and they had to cross a deep river. This happened in the cold wintertime
early in 1550.

So it was that God's people were terribly persecuted all over Hungary
and Moravia. It is impossible to tell all that those who loved God had to
suffer for the sake of righteousness. In his malice and envy the devil, that
enemy of the truth, aroused those who were full of his spirit. There he
found such ready tools, such violent and ruthless servants, that he could
have wished for none more zealous than these, day and night, for they gave
up sleep so as not to miss anything.
A certain brother wished to visit his wife at Nikolsburg. When he
arrived at the castle, where she was nursing the governor's wife, he was
taken to Lord von Liechtenstein, who angrily commanded him to renounce
his faith and the brotherhood - their cause was in vain and had to be rooted
out. But he was not intimidated. Even when they threatened to torture him,
he refused to recant. So they threw him on the ground, tied his feet
together, and hung him head down out of a high window - a heartrending
sight.
He was in such intense pain that his only wish was that they would let
him fall to the ground and put an end to his life, but he had to hang until he
no longer even looked like a man. Then, before he was dead, they pulled
him in. The lord in his rage ordered his servants (to express it with
decency) to cut off the private member from the man's body. But one of
his servants said he had never seen such a thing done: that was work for a
hangman, not for them. At this the tyrant himself took the knife and would
have cut and wounded this brother, but his nobles protested so much that
he stopped. It will bring disgrace to you throughout the country if it is
talked about, they said. But what can one say? Such people know no
shame.
When this maniac learned that the brothers were living in caves and
underground holes on his estates, he planned terrible things: to stab the
brothers to death and to violate the women and rob them of their honor.
But God in his might protected his people and foiled the tyrant's plans, for
they heard of them and got away.
***************

1551 The faithful were at everyone's mercy
In 1551 all work was forbidden to the brothers in many parts of
Moravia, with severe penalties for disobedience. No one was to sell them
anything, either. This was to hasten their departure. So they had to make
do with what they had laid by in peaceful times, because they could not
earn their living anymore.
In addition, prices rose. One and a half bushels of grain cost a gulden,
in some places more, and this lasted into the following year. Now many
were tested by hunger and distress; some had hardly anything warm to eat
in a week or two or even longer. Even dry bread was hard to get. Yet they
gave thanks to God and accepted it all. They raised their hands in praise to
God that they had any food at all and clear water to drink as well. When
they had bread and had water to break it into, they were living well, and
they were glad to work when they had work.
In this time of want, many people pretended to be friendly and
promised good wages if the brothers would work for them. Then they
would withhold the money earned and send the brothers away emptyhanded.
There was a place called Pulgram on the Nikolsburg estates where the
believers were out of danger for a time, so those who were physically
weak took refuge there: the lame, those with leprosy and other illnesses,
also mothers and their newborn babies, who usually have everyone's
sympathy. But it was not to last.
That same year 1551, a butcher named Kontheer came from Austria.
His wife, who was from Hesse, came with him, and he wanted to track
down the brothers on her account, for her former husband had been with us
in Moravia. He gathered a rabble round him, utterly ruthless like himself.
All he wanted was to make himself rich at the expense of those who were
poor. He had no justifiable cause, but the hate kindled in his heart by Satan
drove him to do evil.
First he told lies to the nobles, passing on information with no truth
in it. As a result he got permission to attack the brothers' shelter at

Pulgram and did not rest until he arrived there with his followers. None
were spared. They stole from all whatever they wanted - from the sick, the
children, and the infirm - not even the mothers with newborn babies or the
crippled were spared. Neither friendliness nor entreaty had any effect.
They took whatever they could. In the dark night they dragged the sick and
bedridden out of bed and took away the sheets they lay on. They took
bread and drove hogs and other livestock away. Nothing that was said to
them was received with respect. In a short time, all of the poor little flock
were driven out into the woods, where they camped for some time.
More scoundrels soon arrived, planning to steal from the brothers.
The robbers waited in the bushes during the day so as to get at their
victims quickly when night came and no one could stop them.
The robbers met a brother named Jakob Binder not far from the camp.
They treated him brutally, for his screams could not be heard and there
was no one to see. They robbed him and threw him in the Thaya River.
Then they went and robbed the others. This was what happened to the
poor, the infirm, the sick, and the mothers with newborn babies - to
anyone who was weak.
In this time of deep suffering many of the faithful crossed over into
Austria in little groups and tried to find work, food, and shelter. Some
traveled a long way, north of Retz near the Danube. They went to many
places, one group here, and another there. In Austria they were
occasionally given work and a place to stay. But the devil's envy did not let
them prosper long. That year, 1551, a man called Lang Hans was placed in
office and came as a provost in the name of the king. He rode around
Austria and inquired where the brothers were. He searched in many
villages and listed householders who had lodged them, threatening to
report them to the king in Vienna. He scared them into giving him gifts,
which became his profit. The faithful had no choice but to leave. Even in
the woods they could not stay hidden for long.
So again they were driven out of Austria into Moravia, because no
one was ready to face danger and harm on their account.

In many cases, they left their belongings with those who had
sheltered them, but their trust was betrayed, and things were stolen. Some
who had housed them kept their goods as compensation in case they were
punished for lodging them.
Two more men came in 1551 all the way from Upper Austria. They
had previously wanted to become brothers, especially old Hans Bader's
son. Now all they wanted was to rob. They went from one place to another,
showing a letter of authorization from the king. With two companions to
help them, they appeared before the judge and were well pleased when he
gave them his support.
Many of our possessions had been given to a certain Festel to store in
his house at Schakwitz. In broad daylight these rogues broke in and made
off with it all. No one resisted them. The judge, who should have put a
stop to it, was on their side. Most of the booty was put in his house
overnight. But this thieving was stopped, for God would not permit it. He
roused people in other places, who took the matter in hand when they
heard of such injustice. One of the robbers escaped, but the others were
arrested for their impudent wickedness and taken to the castle at Göding.
There they were held for a long time, to their great annoyance. So they
were put out of action and their spite counted for nothing. God prevented
them from carrying out their evil intentions.
Certainly, the prophet spoke the truth when he said, In all the
neighboring places there will be a violent attack on all who fear the Lord.
They will be like doves; not one will be spared. Their enemies will plunder
and destroy all who fear the Lord. They will take their goods and drive
them out of their homes. Then it will be known who my faithful people
are, who have stood the test like gold in the assayer's fire. 'Listen, my
beloved,' says the Lord, 'understand that the days of harsh suffering are
here, but I will rescue you. Away with your fears and doubts, for God is
your leader!' And truly God rescued his people and led them; otherwise
not one would have been left. They would have been swallowed up like
water on dry earth. But God upheld them and protected their faith.
After this, the faithful still had to wander from place to place in want
and suffering.

Provincial Diets were held, and every lord made sure that brothers
left his land because the king had decreed it and they feared his threats.
Not wishing to incur royal disfavor, they carried out the royal mandate,
although they themselves had often said this was a God-fearing people and
their beliefs were true. The lords feared none but the king. They took no
account of God in heaven. The more the rabble noticed what was
happening, the more recklessly they began to plunder.
The faithful were driven out of Moravia into Hungary, out of Hungary
back into Moravia, out of Moravia into Austria, out of Austria back into
Moravia. In short, they had no home. They were forced to move hither and
thither, and many of them were without shelter, whereas the greatest
villains in the country had no trouble finding lodging.
It would take much too long to tell it all from the beginning, to
recount the various things that happened to the faithful. Many know it only
too well, for they went through it themselves. They were at everyone's
mercy, a spectacle for old and young, for children on the streets, for rich
and poor. No doubt about it their way was small and narrow.
In spite of this long and harsh oppression, they did not waver. They
thanked the Lord that they were found worthy to suffer for his name's
sake. Although to their great sorrow many of their number became
unfaithful and returned to the world, the others held the more firmly to
God. Their only plea was that, he might protect them from evil and keep
them faithful, that he might lend them endurance and strength. This the
Lord granted them, and they overcame everything through faith, the
victory by which we overcome the world. Although the ungodly stormed
and raved, the Lord often thwarted their plans, so their plots came to
nothing. He lets men see his power from time to time to show that if we
only trust him, no one can do anything if it is not his will.
The believers had to suffer all these things because they had accepted
the faith and truth of God, of our Lord Jesus Christ, setting value not on
the pope's infant baptism, but on the baptism of Christ alone. Nor did they
believe in the idolatrous Eucharist, where Christ - in the same manner that
he hung upon the cross with his flesh and blood, skin and hair, hands and
feet - is supposed to be bodily present in such a morsel of bread, on every

occasion, a thousand times over. Instead, they believed that, as the
Scriptures say, the Lord's Supper should be held in remembrance of his
suffering and death, through which he redeemed us and made us members
of his body.
Because the believers had left the impure, wicked church and had
testified against it, Satan, envious from the beginning, worked on that
antichrist, the pope, and on the mob of priests until they made the king do
what they wanted. Then the king forced the lords of the estates to submit
to his will and carry out the priests' wishes.
Woe to them at the time of God's judgment, for then they will no
longer be kings and lords with their priests. They will share the same lot
and judgment as Pharaoh, the Egyptian king who oppressed the Israelite
people, as Sennacherib, proud Haman, King Nebuchadnezzar, and King
Antiochus, who also cruelly oppressed and tormented God's people in
times past, each wanting to bring all nations to his own faith; and as
bloodthirsty Jezebel and her four hundred false prophets, who persecuted
and killed the true prophets of God. All these persecutors will have the
same punishment in eternal damnation if they die without sincere
repentance and conversion. For this reason they are to be pitied and wept
over, not envied. Innocent blood cries out from the earth to God in heaven
and will not be forgotten.
Blessed are those who have endured faithfully to the end, for they
will possess the kingdom of their Father in heaven, which has been
prepared for them from the beginning of the world. During these times of
great tribulation, God added many to the church. People came from many
places and believed, changed their lives, and took up the cross. Often more
joined than later, in good times. They were not put off by great tribulation
because they had true zeal, which led them to genuine Christianity and
love of God.
All this is described and written down as a record, especially for you,
their descendants living in times when God gives peace, so that none of us
think there will always be peace. At the same time, when God blesses us in
temporal matters, let us be thankful and remember that our brothers and
sisters of earlier times would not have known how to praise and thank God

enough if they had had only a half, a third, or even less, of what we have
now. Indeed, anyone who cannot endure now, in these good times, has not
stood the test as a true Christian.
***************

1551 After years of distress, life in community was begun
anew
If ever God should bring similar tribulation on us, their descendants,
we should not be taken by surprise but should show the same patience and
endurance to the end, to the praise and glory of God.
After five years of great distress we gathered once more and began to
practice community as wholeheartedly as ever. We were moved to give our
heartfelt praise, honor, and glory to God in heaven, who sends times of
tribulation and also frees us from them. It had seemed as if we would
never be together again. The ungodly shattered our hopes again and again,
and we thought, If God should ever gather us again, how dear and precious
would each one be to us, how we would love one another, and how we
would thank God!
Now God has granted it. Oh, if only each one would consider and
realize what a grace, what a gift from God it is, to be able to live together
and not need to be involved in the impure life of the world and its
shameless people! Often one's heart weeps like faithful Lot in Sodom. It
would be better to lie under the bench at a gathering of believers than to
recline on one of Sodom's fine beds. The evil ways of the ungodly are a
terrible example for young people. Every time a believer prays to God or
gives thanks, the mockery of the ungodly is at its worst. Think how they
would have railed at the Word of God and other holy things if there had
been the chance to proclaim it! Now, praise be to God on high, he has
granted every opportunity to hear it again.
***************

1550 Wolf Sailer passed away
In 1550, during those years of distress, our dear brother Wolf Sailer,
servant of God's Word and his church, fell asleep in the Lord at Saitz in
Moravia. He had brought us, his fellows in the faith, much wholesome
teaching and comfort. He had put all the psalms of David into verse, and
we still sing them in the church. He had also composed other beautiful
songs of praise and comfort. He was a truly gifted brother. *
***************

1553 New Communities established at Schadowitz and at
Gobschitz,
In 1553 at Sabatisch in Hungary Hans Mändel and Bartel Riegel were
confirmed by the elders with the laying on of hands for the service of the
Gospel and were immediately sent on mission to Tirol. Many people found
faith through their witness. In 1553 the brothers began to establish
communities at Schadowitz and at Gobschitz.
On one occasion at Freischütz in 1554 seventy people at one time
received the baptism commanded by Christ.,
***************

1555 Hans Mändel's and Michael Veldthaler's encounter
with Taufkircher
In 1555 brother Hans Pürchner from Saalen was captured at Kortsch
in the Adige region and was taken by the constables to the governor at
Schlanders. He was immediately interrogated under torture and put on the

rack until he could neither stand on his feet nor walk one step nor bring his
hands to his mouth. Then he was clamped tight in the stocks in a dungeon
and kept there over six months. Finally he was condemned to death and
executed with the sword. A song which we still sing gives witness to his
suffering and death.
That same year, a Bavarian nobleman by the name of Taufkircher sent
a message with some people traveling to Freischütz in Hungary, asking
Leonhard Lanzenstiel, servant of the Lord and of his church, to send
several brothers and a minister to establish a church community in
Bavaria. Since Taufkircher and others with him persisted, promising to
bear patiently all that might happen to them, whatever the cost, and
pleading with the brothers to make the venture for their sake, the brothers
were moved to agree.
It was decided that Hans Mändel, a servant of the Word of God,
should journey to Bavaria. As there had been a special request for brother
Michael Veldthaler to come too, he went on ahead with several brothers,
and after them came brother Christoph Achtznit and others. In spite of the
danger that soon became apparent, they investigated the situation so that
Hans Mändel would know how matters stood when he arrived.
They had thought that in Taufkircher they would meet a man on fire
to talk about questions of faith. Taufkircher, however, had completely
changed his mind; he denied his earlier request for Veldthaler or the
brothers to come, and said he did not want them to visit him and he was
not going to meet them.
He tried to turn some against us who had once been Lutherans like
himself, but who were now filled with love to our church, acknowledging
our faith, teaching, and way of life as better than their own.
When Hans Mändel, a servant of the Lord's Word, arrived to take up
the task for which he had been sent, there was a great uproar against the
believers because many eager hearts responded to him and received the
Word of God. Anger and hatred flared up in Taufkircher. He spread lies
about the zealous, who wanted to hold to the truth. He said that he had
wished to speak with Veldthaler and with the minister Hans Mändel, but

that the zealous had acted impulsively and on their own had arranged for
the visit of Hans Mändel and Veldthaler. This troubled the two brothers a
great deal, and for more reasons than one.
Although this nobleman had agreed to their meeting in his castle at
Guttenburg, he did not keep his word. Instead he planned for it to take
place in an extremely dangerous location: a farmhouse at Galbach, on the
border between two jurisdictions, Kraiburg and Mermos, where he
assembled the worst enemies and defamers of the truth. When this became
known, the zealous regretted that they had promised to have the meeting.
But to avoid giving offense, the brothers attended, though in fear of their
lives. Hans Mändel felt this so keenly that he said, in all the
imprisonments and hardships he had endured since becoming a Christian,
never had anything struck such fear into his heart as this. They could think
of no other solution, however, and felt it was best to go ahead; they put
their trust in the Lord and dared to go that night to the appointed place.
The nobleman was there with his supporters, and the room was filled
to overflowing. People were standing on benches and outside the windows.
Veldthaler went first because he knew the nobleman, and as he and Hans
Mändel entered the room, they wished everyone the grace of God through
Jesus Christ. Then the brothers sat down with Taufkircher to hear what he
thought and what he wanted of them. He started out with lies, saying he
had not asked them to come, had nothing to discuss with them, and did not
need their teaching.
Then he said he was steward of what his Master and Lord had given
him and St. Peter could not take it from him, implying that Peter, and the
brothers, too, forced their followers into community of goods, which
Christ had not done. To these unfitting words Michael Veldthaler replied,
My Lord Taufkircher, you are going too far. It is presumptuous of you to
speak against Peter in this way. You should not do that. Would St. Peter
take yours away? Taufkircher's response was, Oh, you serpent! You
serpent!
Brother Hans Mändel, faithful servant of God that he was, wished to
convince him on this point, but Taufkircher asked them to listen to his

grievances against the brothers and not interrupt, as it would confuse him.
Later he would listen for a whole hour to their point of view.
But having lied about one thing, he was now lying about another. He
started off by asking whether the Holy Spirit came to a person through the
laying on of hands, to which Hans Mändel answered briefly, Yes, but to
varying degrees. At this, Taufkircher shot contemptuous questions at the
brothers, venting his anger and malice. Then he broke off and said he had
not come to be instructed by them. He had summoned them in order to
expose them, to admonish them for leading others astray, and to protect
good people from being misled. A man named Pfenningmann, who had
only recently become a brother, spoke up in front of everyone present,
saying he had not been misled, but it is the very truth, your lordship.
The nobleman got to his feet. He told them that there were spies
everywhere, on land and sea, and if the brothers were caught, they would
have a hard time getting away - they were being too closely watched. They
would have their heads cut off, which would be a good thing - after that
the fires of hell were waiting for them. And he went off with his ungodly
followers.
The brothers reminded him of his promise to let them explain their
standpoint, but it was of no use. The nobleman was so furious with them,
without any cause, that they could only expect the sheriffs and constables
to descend on them the moment he left, as a wolf snatches a sheep or a
hawk takes a dove. But God did not let this happen. He protected them,
mindful of his cause. All praise and honor be to him! This world is full of
pitfalls for those who do the work of the Lord.
***************

1555 Attempts to capture Hans Mändel
It was then decided that Hans Mändel, the servant of the Lord's
Word, should go to several places on this side of the Alz around Kraiburg,

Mermos, Altötting, and Braunau, to proclaim the truth to those longing to
hear it.
As soon as he started out and the four local courts heard of it, they
opposed him with all their might. They sent spies, both secretly and
openly, to find out what was going on. Some of these pretended they
wanted to hear what the faithful taught and were eager to become
believers. When this fraud failed to track Hans Mändel down, the officers
of the law came out in full force, especially those from Mermos. The
sheriff with twenty-four men in armor, equipped with every kind of
weapon, came on horseback and on foot to where the believers were
gathered, since their meeting place had been betrayed. But God in his
grace defeated the enemies' purpose. It was so cold that the ground
crunched underfoot, and the moon was very bright. Besides, the brothers
were keeping good watch and were fully informed. Their enemies set out,
hoping to make a surprise attack, but the Lord made them lose heart. So
halfway there they turned back, saying, The devil tells them everything.
They were furious because they had tried for eleven nights in vain.
Similar attempts were made on the other side of the Alz, in the
jurisdictions of Tittmoning, Trostberg, and Walt. Day and night, the
persecutors worked for the devil: homes were young in faith, they all
recanted except one, Christel, who remained faithful. He testified to the
truth and held to it, and because of his steadfastness, he was condemned to
death and executed with the sword at Mermos in the early months of 1555.
He had never lived in the church community, but once he had come to
know and accept the truth, he defended it with his blood in the strength of
God. One man said he should curse just once - just one little curse - and he
would be set free. But he refused out of love to God and chose a bitter
death instead.
***************

1555 The plight of some of the brothers' children

Messages came from those in prison asking that their little children
be taken into the brothers' care and sent to the church community. The
brothers would have been glad to do this, but it was impossible. After
some consideration, however, they sent for one brother's children, who
were at Grund in the jurisdiction of Mermos. The children were to come to
a place about a mile away, where the brothers were hiding for a day and a
night in the straw.
When the boy arrived with his little sister, the brothers considered
what to do, explaining that the parents had asked them to help the children,
but at that moment it was impossible to get them out of the country
because the river was frozen and every highway and byway was being
watched. They asked the children if they had any relative in the
neighborhood. Yes, they had a cousin. He, too, had received a message
from their parents in prison to look after them. The brothers asked several
times whether their cousin could be trusted if they were to approach him,
and the children assured them there would be no danger. So they sent the
two children to this cousin, asking him to come that night to their house;
the brothers said they would be there, too. They asked the children to give
them a warning if they heard anything strange, which they promised to do.
After the children had explained it all to their cousin, he went straight
to the sheriff at Mermos to inform him. The sheriff was delighted. Hoping
to make a name for himself, he set out early with twenty-four wellequipped men, occupied the house, and had every path watched to prevent
any escape. The brothers suspected nothing. The sheriff kept watch with
his ungodly band until midnight. He got quite angry when time passed and
the brothers did not come. Several times he seized the boy by the hair and
called him a young liar. In the end he said it was a deliberate trick.
The boy replied, My lord, they are sure to come. But the sheriff said:
The devil tells them everything, because the same thing had happened to
him several times before. He went away as if thinking he had been
deceived. But to be on the safe side, he left four men to guard the house,
the worst rogues from among all the servants of Pilate. He gave orders that
if the brothers came they should be taken alive if at all possible. If not,
they should be killed by any available means: struck down, shot, or

strangled. He promised that this would earn a pension for life from his
highness, the prince of Bavaria.
The men did their best. They tried to plan so that no one could escape.
Time went by, and it was two in the morning before the brothers came and
knocked a few times. The scoundrels in the house, figuring the moment
had come, flung the door open and fell on the brothers with loud yells.
They struck at them with their spears. The brothers nearly dropped in their
tracks from fright. The men attacked Christoph Achtznit and struck him
down as if he were an ox; his whole head was covered with blood. Then
they bound him and took him away to Burghausen.
***************

1555 Michael Veldthaler's desperate escape
Brother Michael Veldthaler fled in terror, not knowing which
direction to take. He ran across the garden to the fence, which was high
and covered with thorns, and flung himself over head first. The thorns tore
his face badly, but in his terror he never noticed. He ran across a plowed
field and then a swamp, on through the moonlit night in the bitter cold,
until his feet were soaked from the snow and the mud. He reached a forest
and fell on his knees to pray to the Lord. Soon after, he found himself at
the house from which he and Christoph Achtznit had set out earlier. He
told the householder his plight, but the man did not want him under his
roof again because the noblemen in Mühldorf had heard of their earlier
stay at his place.
Michael had to leave the house, not knowing where to go. He was wet
through and through, and it was snowing and raining. He went into the
woods with no prospect of anything but freezing to death, for he dared not
be seen. He stopped by a thicket and took the clothes off the upper part of
his body to wrap around his legs against the frost and cold. While this was
a help to the lower part of his body, the upper part froze. When he could
stand the cold no longer, he thought rather than freeze, he would go into a

house, whether or not he was caught. Better to die an honorable death than
to freeze to death so miserably. Trusting in the Lord, he risked returning to
the man who had sheltered them before, since there was nowhere else to
go.
Soon a brother came to the house and asked through the window
whether Michael Veldthaler and Christoph Achtznit were there. We do not
know whether the two have been taken prisoner or not, he said.
Michael was overjoyed - it was as if the Lord had sent him an angel.
He set out again, and that same night he bade farewell to a group who were
on their way to the church community, since Hans Mändel was in Upper
Austria and Hansl Gerber with him.
So Michael Veldthaler was somewhat encouraged, but for many
weeks, right into Lent, he had to continue on his own, spreading the
message among people who were eager to learn the truth. Then he traveled
home with those who wanted to join the church community, and they were
protected from the jaws of the ravening lion.
Brother Christoph Achtznit was still in prison at Burghausen. He
remained steadfast, yet the Lord enabled him to escape with a good
conscience, thanks to his relatives. His sister Juliana brought him the
means to set himself free. So he escaped and returned to the church
community.
All this happened in Bavaria, when the light of truth was brought to
the people and began to catch fire among them. God's messengers, who
help others escape destruction, risk paying a high price in this world, and
thus it has been from the beginning.
This account was specially included as a good example of the way our
dear brothers carried out the work of mission in those days, and the
conditions they labored under. Although these two returned safely to the
church community, many had to give their lives for the cause, as we see
again and again in this chronicle.
***************

1556 Peter Ridemann passed away
In 1556 a brilliant comet with a long, sweeping tail was seen in the
sky.
In 1556, on the first day of December, dear brother Peter Ridemann
fell asleep in the Lord at Protzka in Hungary. He was born at Hirschberg in
Silesia, a man inspired and highly gifted by God, a servant of God's Word
and the Elder of the whole church. His teaching and explanation of
Scripture was of great value to us, his companions in the faith.
He had served the church as servant of God's Word for twenty-seven
years; this included a total of nine years in prison. The first time, he was
imprisoned at Gmünden in Upper Austria for three years and four weeks.
It was here that he got the name Peter of Gmünden. The second time, he
was at Nuremberg for four years and ten weeks. The third and last time
was at Marburg and Wolkersdorf in Hesse for about a year and a half.
He endured his bondage for the sake of divine truth and for his
testimony to Jesus Christ, and God the Lord helped him regain his
freedom with a steadfast, peaceful heart and pure conscience without any
dissembling.
Peter Ridemann wrote many wonderful epistles, from prison and
from the community, to brothers and sisters who were also prisoners or
living elsewhere. While incarcerated in Marburg and Wolkersdorf in
Hesse, he wrote down the complete account of our religion, teaching, and
faith. Both in prison and in the church community, he wrote many
beautiful Christian songs, spiritual and biblical, for he was rich in all the
secrets of God. The gift of God's Word flowed from him like running
water and brimmed over. All who heard him were filled with joy. He lived
to be nearly fifty. *

On his deathbed he wrote one more song as a farewell. It begins,

Quitt, ledig, los hat uns gemacht
Christus vom Tod des Teufels Macht
(From death's bonds Christ redeemed us,
From the devil's might he freed us). This is still sung by the
community.

The brothers and the people were in deep grief over his illness and
full of anxiety about his leaving them, so at his end he spoke these words
from the prophet Esdras to them: Go your way, eat the new and drink the
sweet and give gifts to those who have nothing; for this day is holy to our
God. So do not be grieved, for the joy of the Lord is your strength. (1.
Esdras 9:50-54) Then he passed away in the Lord.
***************

1557 Hans Kräl's Imprisonment and release
In 1557 the brothers started communities at Pergen and Voitelsbrunn
and a big community at Kostel.
Also in 1557 Lorenz Huf and other Swiss Brethren in his
congregation in the Rhineland spoke over many articles of faith together,
became united in the Lord, and joined the Hutterian Brothers.
In the same year Peter Diack drove the community out of their place
at Freischütz in Hungary, seizing and carrying off anything he could
transport.
In this year, shortly before Ascension Day, brother Hans Kräl (called
Kitzbühler after his birthplace) was taken prisoner for the sake of divine
truth at Taufers in the Puster Valley. For two years, all but five weeks he

suffered harsh imprisonment there, one and a half years in a dungeon and
thirty-seven weeks in the stocks in another prison. Then, escorted by a
constable, he was sent off to the galleys. In Niederdorf in the Puster Valley
he regained his freedom without stain to his conscience and returned in
peace to the church. He made a song, still sung among us, which recounts
his hardships and sufferings. *
***************

1558 Bastel Binder denies the truth & dies unable to repent
On January 9, 1558, at Aachen in the Netherlands, Hans Raiffer, a
smith by trade, a servant of the Gospel and an apostle of Jesus Christ, was
captured with eleven others for the sake of divine truth. He was questioned
under torture and kept prisoner for some months until the autumn. During
this time he wrote many fine letters and epistles to the church of the Lord
and his fellow prisoners, and also made beautiful songs of praise to God.
Hans Raiffer and the four brothers, Matthias Schmidt, Heinrich
Adam, Hans Werner, and Tulman Schneider were each bound to a pillar
and strangled. The sixth brother recanted, but soon made his way back to
the community and found repentance. After long imprisonment and cruel
treatment, the six sisters were beaten with rods and set free. They returned
to the church in the peace of God. But the brothers had to seal their
faithful witness to divine truth by shedding their blood.
The endurance of these brothers and sisters so shook and convinced
the people of Aachen that they stopped hunting them and left them
unmolested. They felt a deep remorse for what they had done, especially
those who were directly involved. Without doubt they must have suffered
many pangs of conscience.
From this time onward, many people from the Netherlands, Aachen,
and the Rhineland were filled with zeal, wanting to change their lives, and
they joined the church.

During this year 1558 communities were begun at Neumühl and
Tracht. *
Also this year Conrad Haintzeman, a young brother and a cobbler by
trade, was taken prisoner at Stein near Krems on the Danube while
traveling from Swabia with a little group of believers.
A few days earlier Bastel Binder, another brother, had been traveling
in the same area with a group from the Adige Valley and had also been
captured at Stein. Bastel Binder renounced his faith because he was so
badly mistreated by the authorities. When Conrad Haintzeman was
arrested, he knew nothing about these others. He did not find out until he
was brought into court. There, in front of the magistrates, the priests
baptized a newborn baby with their useless, misleading infant baptism.
The judge asked the unfaithful Bastel whether that was true Christian
baptism.
Yes, said Bastel, it is
Bastel, you are speaking against God and your own conscience, said
brother Conrad, contradicting him in front of the magistrates. The judge
was furious with Conrad and shouted insults at him. At this, Bastel denied
the truth again in such a terrible way that the magistrates said they would
never forget it.
Bastel was then released. He made his way to Pergen in Moravia as if
he wanted to repent. Suddenly he died of the plague, cut off by the wrath
of God without having found repentance.
Brother Conrad was taken to Vienna and handed over to the
magistrates. For the sake of his faith in divine truth he was imprisoned in
the courthouse for a year and several weeks. While he was there, Emperor
Ferdinand attended the great Imperial Diet at Augsburg. The bishop of
Vienna had Conrad brought before him twice in the dark of night, for he
wanted to have him executed in secret. The Lord frustrated his plan and
brought it to nothing, for a Lutheran chaplain appealed to King
Maximilian on Conrad's behalf, and the king released him. Then, with
unsullied heart and a good conscience, Conrad traveled back to Moravia

and to the church community. Two letters are still preserved which he
wrote to the church from prison.
***************

1559 Wolf Mair and Wolf Huber executed at Salzburg
In 1559, two brothers, Wolf Mair and Wolf Huber, were arrested in
the Salzburg area because of their belief in divine truth. They were taken
to Tittmoning and on to Salzburg. At both places they were cruelly
tortured and after great suffering they were put to death. They were
executed with the sword and then burned. Songs testify to their willingness
for martyrdom. *
***************

1560 Klaus Felbinger's and Hans Leutner's undismayed
execution
In 1560, three brothers were chosen and appointed to the service of
the Gospel: Hans Kräl, Michel Veldthaler, and Conrad Haintzeman.
That same year, brother Klaus Felbinger or Schlosser, a servant of
God's Word who was still in a time of testing, was arrested near Neumarkt
in Bavaria, together with another brother, Hans Leutner. They were taken
to Landshut and handed over to the authorities. The magistrates and priests
tried many different methods, from agonizing tortures to kindness, but
they could not bring the brothers to renounce divine truth. This is well
proved in the epistle that dear brother Klaus Felbinger wrote from prison
to Leonhard Seiler, and which we still have in the community.
After this they were sentenced to death by the sword. Brother Hans
Leutner, who was to go first to the execution block, said to Klaus, Now,

brother Klaus, if my death will terrify you, then you go first and I will wait
till last. Brother Klaus replied, No! Oh, no! I will not be terrified. So Hans
gave his neck to the sword, and Klaus looked on undismayed. He did not
even turn pale. Anyone who did not know would have thought it did not
concern him. Then he, too, stepped forward, knelt down, and gave his head
for the sake of faith and divine truth. Both brothers witnessed valiantly
with their blood. They were executed on July 19, 1560.
***************

1560 Hans Mändel forewarned of suffering in dungeon
On the Friday after St. Martin's Day Nov. 11, 1560, Hans Mändel,
also called Klein (Little) Hansel, was taken prisoner near Rosenheim in
Bavaria because of his belief in divine truth. He was a servant of God's
Word and his church and had been sent on mission into other lands many
times. Arrested with him were Jörg Rack, a servant for temporal needs,
and Eustachius Kotter, a vinedresser.
They were taken to Innsbruck and handed over to the authorities.
Because Hans Mändel was a minister, he was imprisoned in the
Vellenburg, in a deep dungeon. He wrote that it was full of worms and
vermin. The bats flew around him until the dungeon whirred with them,
and the mice carried away his food and ran around him in great numbers.
The spirits whom God sends to terrify the ungodly at night were now
sent to serve and help him. The Lord forewarned him through such a spirit
when the noblemen were coming to question him. It called him by name
and told him to prepare himself and to be ready to suffer. (Jörg Liebich
had been imprisoned several years earlier in the same dungeon and had
suffered many attacks of the evil one.)
The other two brothers were put in the Krauterturm at Innsbruck. All
three remained in prison until the following year, 1561.

On January 2, the authorities questioned Hans Mändel, using both
friendliness and cruelty. Then they questioned Eustachius and Jörg Rack,
each separately. The brothers staunchly defended many points of their
belief. Minutes were made at the hearing and sent to Vienna and elsewhere
for examination. The most relevant parts of their confessions were
selected, and we have them in writing word for word in the church.
After their trial they were returned to their dungeons and stayed there
until June 13, the Friday after St. Vitus' Day, when they were condemned
to death because they would not be moved from their faith.
A great crowd was present when their sentence was read out. The
brothers spoke powerfully to the magistrates and jurors about the
judgment they were bringing upon themselves from God: shedding
innocent blood would cause their damnation even though they said they
had to judge according to the imperial mandate.
Hans Mändel told them, You blind world, each of you must judge
according to your own conscience, so that you can answer for it before
God! If you judge and condemn according to the imperial mandate, how
can you answer to God?
Brother Eustachius also said, What do we care about the imperial
mandate you read out to us? Read out of our Confession of Faith, based on
Holy Scripture. It is God's truth for which we must suffer today. They
spoke joyfully and called the people to repentance.
When brothers Jörg Rack and Eustachius were led out of the
courthouse, Jörg began to call to people all along the streets until they
reached the place of execution. He urged them to turn from their sins,
repent, and follow the way of truth: it was for this truth that he was being
executed that day.
The servant Hans Mändel was now brought to the place of execution,
and the brothers met in great joy and praised God. Brother Leonhard Dax
came up and greeted them. They shook hands and took leave of one
another, the condemned brothers joyfully praising God that they had still
been able to see another believer.

Hans Mändel spoke to the people, calling them to repent of their sins
and follow the truth of God so that they would not be damned but might
find salvation in Christ Jesus. Yes, he raised his voice valiantly, saying,
What I have taught and confessed is divine truth, and today I will witness
to it with my blood. And he did not stop proclaiming repentance.
The judge said several times, Now, Hans, listen a moment! Then he
was quiet for a while, but afterward he went on speaking until he was
almost hoarse. Right up to their deaths, the brothers exhorted the people to
turn away from the unjust life of this world. They were not cut short but
given ample opportunity to speak.
They were also allowed to pray together. So they brought their earnest
prayer to God, praising and thanking him for keeping them steadfast in
faith all this time, and asking that he continue to do so until their deaths,
now so close upon them. They commended their spirits into the Lord's
hands when body and soul should part.
Their indictment was read out to them, and the following points were
stressed:
FIRST, they did not believe that the blessed body of Jesus Christ is
present in the bread at the mass but believed in celebrating the Lord's
Supper just as Christ held it with his disciples.
SECOND, they set no value on infant baptism, valuing only the true
Christian baptism that Christ commanded his disciples to practice.
THIRD, they upheld Marriage - they acknowledged this and did not
contradict it.
Other articles of faith were read out. For each point they first stated
the Roman Catholic position and then that of the brothers. The clerk who
had put the record together had great understanding for the brothers and
did not want to give it a slanderous and blasphemous slant as is usually
done.

After that, the brothers were taken to their execution on the hog
meadow near the huntsman's shed. There, Eustachius, who was sickly and
weak, was beheaded first. Next Jörg Rack went joyfully up to the
executioner, spun around on one foot, and cried out, Here I forsake wife
and child, house and home, life and limb for the sake of divine truth! He
knelt down, and the executioner beheaded him, too.
Hans Mändel was last. When he saw the two lying there beheaded, he
said as if to himself, My brothers, he who overcomes will inherit all
things.
The executioner took him, bound him to the ladder, kindled the fire,
and pushed him in, still living. Then he put the two beheaded bodies on the
pyre as well and burned them all to ashes.
In this manner, the three brothers courageously sealed their witness to
the true faith in Christ with their lives and their deaths, their words and
their blood, and God gave them the victory. Brother Stoffel Schneider, who
was present, saw and heard how courageous they were.
There still exist letters to the church, written by the brothers in
prison, and songs they made up and sang in their bondage and suffering.
In the year 1560, a community was begun at Niemtschan on the other
side of Austerlitz.
***************

1564 Rebellious members excluded & repented
In 1564 several members - Christel Schmidt, Jörg Knofloch, Hans
Neuhöfel, and others - banded together to oppose the ministers and elders
on the church's attitude toward divorce. They were excluded.
Later some repented, but the others went the way of the world, and
they bear their own judgment. They died soon after in their sins.

On their deathbeds they lamented bitterly and were full of fear and
remorse, especially Knofloch and Neuhöfel. They longed for repentance
and peace with the church but did not experience it.
In 1564, we started the community at Turnitz. *
In 1564, Brother Julius Klampferer from northern Italy was
imprisoned at Venice for the sake of divine truth. He was interrogated
many times. His examiners argued with him to make him recant, but he
answered every question with the simple truth. In the end, after he had
shown great steadfastness, he was sentenced to be thrown into the depths
of the sea and this was carried out.
***************

1565 Leonhart Lanzenstiel passed away/Church entrusted to
Peter Walpot
In the year 1565, dear brother Leonhard Lanzenstiel or Seiler became
ill and fell asleep in the Lord on March 3 at Klein Niemtschitz near
Prahlitz. He was a servant of Jesus Christ and as Elder had led the whole
church, which had been entrusted to his care by Hans Amon at the
beginning of 1542. For twenty-three years he faithfully cared for the
church, enduring much suffering and many struggles, and enriching us, his
brothers in the faith, with his teaching and explanation of the Scriptures.
He also wrote comforting letters to those who were suffering or in prison.
When he himself was in prison for the sake of divine truth, he wrote
similar letters to the church. Some of them are still preserved among us.
Soon after Leonhard had passed away, brothers from many
communities met with the elders, and after taking counsel in the fear of
God, they elected brother Peter Walpot or Scherer to take Leonhard's
place. Peter Walpot had been faithfully carrying out the service of God's
Word for twenty-three years. They entrusted the church of the Lord to him,
to look after its needs and keep watch over it, to care for it in every way.

From this time on he carried out this task with utmost diligence and
trustworthiness until he departed from this world, as is told later.
About this time in 1565, two brothers were put to death in Venice
after having been in prison for almost two years. They were Franciscus
von der Sach, born in Italy, who was a servant of the Word still in a time of
testing, and his companion, a brother called Antonius Walsch. They were
drowned in the sea for the sake of divine truth.
This same year, 1565, Farwendel, an old minister or teacher among
the Swiss Brethren, united with us at Neustadt in the Haardt near the Rhine
River.
This year we brothers founded the community at Pribitz, building on
a green meadow with the permission of Lord Friedrich von Zerotin and auf
Seelowitz. *
This year we also began the community at Landshut. **
The same year, several Gabrielite brothers from Kreuz, including old
Georg Weber and his sons, became one with us in faith and joined the
church community. Our brothers moved to Kreuz and established
community in accordance with true Christian faith. ***
***************

1566 Bohemian chancellor drowned by breaking bridge
At this time, the following incidents took place in Vienna, Austria.
The Bohemian chancellor from Neuhaus spitefully intended to destroy our
faith. He begged the emperor Maximilian II for permission to drive the
brotherhoods out of Moravia with the support of the bishop. If everything
had gone as he wished, it would have caused great distress for the church
of God. As soon as the emperor yielded to his persistent requests and gave
him a letter to that effect, he set out. He took leave of the lords in Vienna,
saying, If God helps me return over this ditch (the Danube), you'll hear

some news. He started out, but as his carriage drove onto the bridge, a
beam gave way under him. The bridge fell into the Danube, taking horse,
carriage, and all with it, and the chancellor and two others were drowned.
Only his servant boy managed to keep afloat. When the boy saw that his
lord was dead and was being carried away by the current, he seized him by
the beard and shouted for help.
Both of them were pulled out of the river and brought to the emperor.
The emperor took the dead chancellor's golden chain from his neck and
put it on the boy, then had the dead man carried back to Neuhaus. This was
the news of which the Bohemian chancellor had spoken, not knowing what
it would be. The emperor and everybody else saw it as a judgment of God.
It is hard to kick against the goad, or to fight against God and attack the
faith.
This is how God deals at times with those who plan evil and want to
spill innocent blood or slaughter the son before his father's eyes. For God
says through the prophets, Whoever touches you touches the apple of his
eye. (Zecharias 2:8) He lets them take counsel, but he brings their counsels
to naught. (Isaiah 8:10)
***************

1567 Brothers severely tortured
In 1567, brother Burkhard Bämerle, an old servant of the Word and
of the Gospel, fell asleep in the Lord. Previously he had been in prison
with Bärtel Riegel of Gündelbach because of his faith. There they had
racked him terribly. (It was not merely a heavy weight that they had hung
on him but the whole earth, tying him to a ring fixed in the floor and
pulling him up until the sun could have shone through him. Yet he
remained true to the Lord and firm in his faith.) After many trials and
struggles, he passed away at Tracht in Moravia.
This same year 1567, brother Hans Mang or Huter, a hatter by trade,
was held in the prison infirmary at Sonthofen in Swabia for the sake of

divine truth. He suffered severely from the cold in winter, for the irons
made his feet so cold they could not get warm all night, as he wrote in a
letter. But he said that on the Last Day these chains will give him warmth
and comfort and be a better adornment than the gold chains around the
necks of the ungodly. He remained steadfast, withstanding all the cruel
attacks, and fell asleep in the Lord in the prison infirmary.
In this year 1567 brother Nikolaus Geyersbühler, a miller by trade, a
servant for temporal needs, was imprisoned at Innsbruck for the sake of
divine truth. There the Jesuits and others set upon him, using both subtle
and violent means. But nothing could shake his faith. He was condemned
to death, beheaded, and then burned. With his blood he gave valiant
witness to the holy and divine truth.
That same year we founded communities at Wostitz, Tscheikowitz,
and Pruschanek. *
On the Sunday before St. Martin's Day [Nov. 11], brother Leonhard
Dax was arrested. Thirteen years earlier he had been a priest who had
loathed our way of life and persecuted the believers whenever he could. In
his efforts to force a recantation he had shown great brutality to a brother
named Hans Pürchner. The brother was executed at Schlanders in 1555, as
has already been recorded. A little later Leonhard Dax began to change.
After thinking things over, he was converted and abandoned the
priesthood. He joined the church community and learned to do every kind
of work. Later, he was chosen and confirmed as a servant of God's Word
and sent out on mission to the lands along the Rhine, where he and six
others were captured for the sake of their witness to Jesus Christ and were
taken to Alzey in the Palatinate. When they had been there two weeks, the
superintendent of Alzey (a Zwinglian preacher) and several others came
twice to interrogate him, asking many questions on points of faith. Brother
Leonhard responded with a clear witness to the truth. We have a
transcription of his defense. None of the seven wavered from the truth.
They were all released in 1568 and joyfully returned to the church
community.
***************

1568 Hans Arbeiter's imprisonment and release
On July 18, 1568, a servant of God's Word and his church, Hans
Arbeiter from Aachen and another brother, Heinrich Schuster, were
captured at Hainbach on the Rhine in the bishopric of Speyer. The village
mayor told the constable to chain them, but the latter refused, for he did
not want to share the guilt of imprisoning innocent men. He said to the
mayor, You cannot order me to chain these men, who are much more
devout than I am. Had I known they would be put in prison, I would have
warned them.
So the mayor bound them himself and sent them to Kirweiler. There
Hans Arbeiter was put in a dark dungeon, cut off from the light of day, and
Heinrich was put in the jail.
After two weeks, the bishop's sheriff and nine others arrived to give
each of the prisoners a separate hearing, asking why they had entered their
lord's estate and misled his people.
Hans's answer, the further cross examinations, and the talks held with
him by the Jesuits, Dr. Lamprecht, foremost preacher in Speyer cathedral,
are all described by brother Hans Arbeiter himself and - praise God! - the
record is still among us. It can be found in the little book known as the
Droscher book and also in the epistle book. A song in three sections about
the trial and all that happened has also survived and we still sing it. *
When the enemy of divine truth had exhausted his efforts against the
brothers and they had not given way, the chief bailiff came twice more, to
tell them that if they would promise never to enter the country again, they
would be released. They refused, saying they had to go wherever God sent
them throughout their lives and they could not promise to stay out of any
area. In the end, after twenty-nine weeks in prison, they were released
without any conditions. They returned to the church, steadfast and in peace
and joy, and the church rejoiced and praised God.
***************

1569 God graciously provided for his people in time of
famine
In 1569, when dear brother Peter Walpot was Elder and shepherd of
the church, a period of great scarcity began. It became so severe that in the
following year, 1570, one and a half bushels of wheat cost two talers and
was difficult to get even at that price. A loaf of bread cost forty-five
kreuzer. Never in people's memory had there been such a famine in
Moravia. Hunger and distress came upon them as a severe punishment for
their ingratitude and their sins.
Conditions improved a little in 1571, and in 1572 grain was available
again. Throughout this long and difficult time, God so mercifully provided
for his people that, on the whole, no one suffered privation in the true
sense of the word, considering the serious conditions at that time.
God provided through the diligence and foresight of the elders,
servants of the Word, and servants for temporal needs, who faithfully
cared for his people. They were constantly trying to find ways to support
and feed his church community, with its widows and orphans. They
challenged the people to be grateful, and shared out the church's resources
with great care, giving help and advice in a loving and brotherly way. God
blessed us and gave enough that we were able to help other poor people in
Moravia outside our communities. But we had to live very frugally
compared with those times when a certain portion of bread was always on
the table.
In these difficult years, the church was almost drained of its
resources, and if the shortage had lasted any longer, there would have been
great distress, since there were so many of us living together. But the Lord,
who knows the right time, mercifully intervened. Praise and thanks be to
him for all his help.
***************

1569 God prevents harm from coming upon communities
During the following years, God gave his people quiet times. In
honor of his name we must record this in detail, for after the Lord had
purified his church in various ways, allowing it to experience all kinds of
tribulation and poverty for years (as can be found above in this book), he
granted his people peace and rich blessings, as he did to the devout Job
after his time of testing. This he did to see how they would prove
themselves in such years and to make sure that his work and plans would
be publicly carried out and become known to all people far and wide.
God, therefore, gave his people times of peace, contrary to the
intentions of the whole world, with the result that for twenty years or more
there was no general persecution (as will be seen in this chronicle) except
for a few incidents now and then.
However, in these times many accusations were made and decrees
issued by the emperor and the king at the Imperial Diets, as well as in the
Provincial Diets, which were made up of various estates and faiths.
Although they were otherwise quite disunited, in this they all agreed: that
this people should be exterminated and not tolerated anywhere.
But the Lord prevented this in many ways. At times he gave the
persecutors something else to worry about, or made them lose courage to
carry out their plans. The Lord often thwarts the counsels of the mighty,
for he can trim the sails according to his own wind.
Although many resolved not to lay their heads on a pillow until they
had expelled and exterminated God's people, although they received power
(but not from God) for this purpose, the Lord destroyed them before they
could begin. Many intended to inflict suffering on his people but only
brought harm to themselves.
There was a great deal of discussion. One counseled that they [the
believers] should all be hanged; another wanted to burn them; a third to

seize their elders, thereby destroying them at the roots. But most of these
people, as we have learned, did not live long. We could even give names.
As usual, wherever possible, the tribe of priests kept stirring up the
powers that be. But the Lord our God stood in the way. The Archangel
Michael stood watch over his people; otherwise, they would long since
have been swallowed up and devoured like bread. But as a hen gathers her
young under her wings, protecting them by pecking at all that want to
attack her own - indeed, as an eagle hovers over its young - this and much
more God did for the sake of his people. Even the unbelievers often had to
acknowledge that God refused to let this people be driven away or
annihilated.
They lived in the land God had provided especially for them. They
were given the wings of a great eagle and flew to the place God had
prepared for them, and they were sustained there as long as it pleased him.
***************

1569 Description of the community and manner of its inner
and outer life
Thus they gathered in peace and unity and openly preached the Word
of God. Twice a week, sometimes more often, they held meetings in which
the common, united prayer was offered to God, asking him for all the
needs of the brotherhood and giving joyful thanks for all the good things
they enjoyed. Likewise, intercession was made for emperor, king, princes,
and worldly authorities, that God might make them think about the office
entrusted to them and conduct it properly, to govern peacefully and protect
the faithful.
Furthermore, the Christian ban was used against the wicked when
they were discovered in the brotherhood. The brotherhood banned and
punished each according to his sin. When they showed true repentance,
they were reaccepted into the church.

In accordance with the Lord's command and the practice of the
apostles, Christian baptism was given to adults who could hear the Word
of God and could understand, accept, and believe it - infant baptism being
the complete opposite and totally false.
The people met and celebrated the Lord's Supper to remember and
continually refresh the holy memory of the suffering and death of Jesus
Christ: through his death he has redeemed us who were otherwise lost,
restoring us and making us of one mind as members of his body. It was a
celebration of thanksgiving for his love and unspeakable kindness in all he
has done for our sakes; we in turn should keep this meal for his sake in
thanksgiving. Such a celebration of the Lord's Supper is the opposite of the
idolatrous sacrament of the priests.
They practiced Christian community of goods as Christ taught it and
lived it with his disciples and as the first apostolic church practiced it. No
others dared try it. Those who earlier had been rich or poor now shared one
purse, one house, and one table - yet the healthy were treated as healthy,
the sick cared for as sick, and the children looked after as children.
Swords and spears were forged into pruning knives, scythes, and
other tools. There was no musket, saber, halberd, or any other weapon of
defense. Each member was a brother to the other. They were a thoroughly
peaceful people who never took part in any war or bloodshed by paying
war taxes, much less by active participation. They did not resort to
revenge - patience was their weapon in all strife.
They were subject to the authorities and obedient to them in all good
works, in all things that were not against God, their faith, or their
conscience. They paid their taxes, annual dues, interest, tithes, and
customs, and they did their compulsory labor. They honored the governing
authorities because of their divinely ordained office, which is as much
needed in this wicked world as daily bread.
In conclusion, all twelve articles of the Christian apostolic faith and
all things founded on Holy Scripture were confessed and observed.

Christian mission was carried out according to the command of the
Lord: As my Father has sent me, so I send you. Also: I have chosen and
appointed you that you go out and bear fruit. Therefore, each year servants
of the Gospel and their assistants were sent out into the lands where there
was a call. They visited those who wanted to change their lives, who
sought and inquired after the truth. These they led out of their land by day
and by night at their own request, heedless of constable and hangman, with
the result that many lost their lives for the sake of this cause. Thus they
gathered God's people in a manner befitting good shepherds.
They separated themselves from the world and its evil, unjust life.
They shunned especially the false prophets and false brothers.
Cursing and profanity, without which the world cannot speak, were
never heard among them. No oaths were sworn or promises made. There
was no dancing, gambling, or carousing. They did not make fancy,
fashionable, or immodest clothes; such things were done away with. They
did not sing shameful, immoral songs, which the world is full of, but
Christian and spiritual songs and songs of Bible stories.
Leadership was entrusted to the elders, men who guided the people
with the Word of God by reading, teaching, and exhorting them through
Scripture. They practiced admonition and reconciliation, putting right any
mistakes and wrongdoings.
Brothers were carefully chosen to take charge of the management of
temporal needs. They made and received payments, provided for food and
supplies, and did the buying and selling.
Others were in charge of organizing the work and sending each one to
the job he knew and could do well, in the fields or wherever necessary.
These were the work distributors.
There were brothers appointed to serving at table. The meals began
with prayer and thanksgiving to God, and thanks were given at the end
before returning to work. Thanksgiving and prayer were offered at bedtime
and again in the morning before going to work.

Certain brothers were responsible for the school. Together with the
sisters, they looked after the children and their needs in all areas.
There was no usury, no buying and selling for gain. There was only
honest labor to earn a living through the daily toil of the harvesters and
farm workers in the vineyards, fields, and gardens.
Carpenters and builders went out within Moravia and as far as
Austria, Hungary, and Bohemia to build many fine, efficient mills,
breweries, and other buildings at fair wages for the lords, nobles, and
various citizens. A brother was especially assigned for this purpose, an
experienced builder who organized the carpenters, accepted work,
bargained, and made agreements on behalf of the brotherhood.
Many of the brothers were millers, and there were many mills in that
area whose owners asked the brothers to take them over and look after the
grinding for a third or a fourth share, which was a fair deal according to
current practice. So the brotherhood appointed a brother to oversee the
mills. With the advice of the elders, he made all the agreements, assigned
the millers, and saw to it that the mills were staffed and functioning well.
For a long time the lords and noblemen (especially those on whose
land we lived) employed our people to run their farms and other work
departments, some for a third share, some for wages, or whatever was
acceptable to both parties.
A brother was responsible for taking on such farms as the community
could manage, often after repeated requests by the landlords. He made the
arrangements and saw to it that enough people were available to staff
them.
In short, no one was idle; each did what was required and what he was
able to do, regardless of what he had been before - rich or poor, aristocrat
or commoner. Even the priests who joined the community learned to work.
All sorts of honest, useful trades were represented: those of mason,
sicklesmith, blacksmith, coppersmith, locksmith, clockmaker, knifemaker,
plumber, tanner, furrier, cobbler, saddler, harness maker, bag maker,

wagon maker, cooper, joiner, turner, hatter, cloth maker, tailor, blanket
maker, weaver, rope maker, sieve maker, glazier, potter, brewer of beer,
barber-surgeon, and physician. In each department of work one brother
was in charge of the shop, accepted orders and planned the work, then sold
the products at their fair value and handed the proceeds over to the church.
Everyone, wherever he was, worked for the common good to supply
the needs of all and to give help and support wherever it was needed. It
was indeed a perfect body whose living, active members served one
another.
Think of the ingenious works of a clock, where one piece helps
another to make it go, so that it serves its purpose. Or think of the bees,
those useful little insects working together in their hive, some making
wax, some honey, some fetching water, until their noble work of making
sweet honey is done, not only for their own needs but enough to share with
man. That is how it was there.
Good order is essential in all areas, for the matters of life can be
properly maintained and furthered only where order reigns - even more so
in the house of God, since the master builder and founder is the Lord
himself. Where there is no order, there is disorder. There God does not
dwell, and the house soon collapses.
The brothers became widely known through those servants of the
Word and other brothers imprisoned in different places for the sake of
their witness to Jesus Christ and his truth. In many different ways, they
were closely questioned about the basis of their faith. This happened all
over the German-speaking lands, wherever brothers were imprisoned,
some for long periods of time. In word and deed, by their lives and their
deaths, they testified that their faith was the truth.
***************

Reliable workers, but hated by all

Moreover, emperors, kings, princes, lords, and those at their courts,
especially in the German-speaking lands, became acquainted with the
brotherhood's religion, teaching, faith, and life. They often came to see for
themselves, and commoners came, too, and learned the communities were
harmless and that the evil reports about the brothers were untrue. Many
were convinced and praised them as a devout people who must have been
established by God, otherwise it would have been impossible for so many
to live together in unity; for among themselves, when only two, three, or
four live together in one house, they are constantly in each others' hair and
quarrel until they have to part company.
Some preferred to have brothers rather than anyone else working for
them and serving them. Because they were so reliable, everyone wanted
the benefit of their work. From this point of view there were far too few
brothers in the land. But when it came to religion they were always
thought to be too many.
It was a remarkable situation: Some lords were angry and ill-disposed
toward the brothers because of their faith, and they did not want them to
be tolerated in the land. Others were angry that not more brothers were
assigned to work for them, although they had kept asking for many years.
In short, some wanted to have them accepted; others wanted to have them
expelled. Some said the best about them, others the worst.
The world did not want to tolerate them but had to. God divided the
sea - the raging nations of this world - so that people could be gathered
from all lands and dwell together in great numbers, fearlessly doing the
work of the Lord against the devil and the world. Indeed, it is a wonderful
handiwork of God, when you think about it. Some people thought it was
right for those who had the strength. The majority, in their blindness, saw
it as error and seduction or as only a human undertaking.
The world in general so hated and envied them that they might have
said with David, We have more enemies than hairs on our head. As soon as
they stepped outside the door, they were abused and called Anabaptists, rebaptizers, new baptizers, renegades, fanatics, and all kinds of insulting
names. People everywhere disparaged them and taunted them with
gruesome lies, accusing them of eating children and other horrible things

that would have shocked us deeply had we even dreamed of them, much
less done them. Many slanderous accusations of things that are not human,
let alone Christian, were brought against the brotherhood to lay it open to
suspicion and hatred.
The world hated and persecuted us solely for the sake of Christ's
name and his truth, because we followed him, and for no other reason. And
this was a sure sign: If someone traveled with only a staff in his hand to
show that he did not mean to harm anyone, or if he prayed before eating,
he was called an Anabaptist, a heretic. Such is the stupidity of the devil.
But if someone became unfaithful and walked according to the ways of the
heathen, a sword at his side and a musket on his shoulder, from that
moment on he was welcome to the world and a good Christian in their
eyes.
A man who wore no ruff around his neck or other signs of vanity in
his attire, who declared that gambling, haughtiness, gluttony, drunkenness,
and carousing are evil and against God, and who conducted himself in a
quiet way with patience and other qualities befitting a disciple of Christ such a person was reckoned by the world to be a heretic, a sectarian, a
deceiver, or a fool. He was hated and despised by people who had never
seen him before, and who could accuse him of no wrongdoing since he had
harmed no one and had no wish to do so.
But as soon as someone was unfaithful, returned to the world, and
stepped into the inn saying, Boys, let me treat you to a drink, singing
immoral songs, drinking wildly with others, and sticking a plume in his
hat like a fool; as soon as he indulged in gambling and dancing, wore a
huge ruff around his neck, baggy breeches, and clothes with ornamental
slits; as soon as he made a show of their thousand and one much-honored
sacraments, spread syphilis and other dreadful diseases, and cursed and
blasphemed God - from that moment on such a person was befriended by
the world and acknowledged again as one of them. They approved of him
and said, Well done! You were right to leave the brothers and be converted
and become a good Christian. Now that you have the true faith, never let
yourself be led astray from our church again. You did well to leave the
brothers and separate yourself from their sect - as they call us. Wherever

he went, he found good friends. People liked him and accepted him, even
if they had never seen him before. They could see all his wicked deeds and
vices, and still he was liked by the world because he had forsaken the truth
of God.
From all this it is clear that they hate and persecute us simply because
we are zealous for God. Envy, stemming from the old serpent, is behind
their hatred of God's truth. No one wants to admit it, but there is no
denying it.
Eventually even the people living in our area began to hate and envy
us, as Esau envied Jakob, on account of the blessings God poured out on us
over and above what we earned with the toil of our hands. We had what we
needed in house and home and - thank God - food, while they for the most
part had to make do with very little because they spent it all on drink.
They wasted their time and often squandered their money on drinks before
they had even earned it. They loved to be idle and lazy.
What shall we say, then, about the false brothers and communities
who complained about God's brotherhood more than about anyone else?
They found fault with the brotherhood on every point. They hated us and
resented it when we admonished them about their deviations. That verse in
the Gospel is indeed true where Christ says about his own, You will be
hated by everyone for my name's sake. (Matthew 10:22) Because the
Lord's Word is truly fulfilled in us, we are reassured and strengthened all
the more.
The Lord also strengthens us, his church, through those who forsake
the truth and return to the world. Many of them - however long they live
outside - have no peace in their hearts day in, day out, awake or asleep. No
matter what they set themselves to do, their consciences smite them
constantly and their hearts pound with fear because of their unfaithfulness.
They return deeply convicted, and in tears they repent and confess their
sins, seeking peace with God and his church, ready to die rather than
forsake the truth again.
Indeed, the number of such experiences gives us a deep certainty.
With pain and horror we have seen for ourselves the despair of those

backsliders who had once confessed and accepted God's truth but then
deviated from it. For when God struck them down with sickness, and death
hovered over them (a time when all things are revealed to a man), they
lamented miserably: Too late and in vain they were overcome with
remorse because they had turned away from the truth and had to die in
their backsliding.
Some saw their punishment before their very eyes and were beside
themselves, crying out, Woe is me! and seeing themselves as beyond help.
Others said that with their own feet they had kicked the door of heaven
shut in front of them. Still others admitted that if only they had remained
brothers and had repented, they would gladly die and part from this life.
Many prayed in fear and trembling and pleaded with God to restore their
health just once more. Then they would repent and return to what they had
forsaken. Many of those who recovered did just that without a moment's
hesitation. Many, however, were never able to attain such a reconciliation
but, as already stated, died with a burdened conscience and in deep dread
because they had mocked God too many times. When God had called
them, they had not wanted to listen. Now, when they pleaded, the Lord
turned a deaf ear.
Here we will end this part of the account and return again to the
description of other matters.
***************

1570 Several brothers sent out on mission
In 1570, the elders of the church decided to send brother Georg
Rader to Tirol, Hans Langenbach to the Rhine, Klaus Braidl or Schuster to
Württemberg, and Peter Horich to Silesia, all to do the Lord's work among
the people. Before brother Peter Horich left, he was confirmed in the
service of the Gospel by the elders with the laying on of hands. This took
place at Klein Niemtschitz near Prahlitz.
***************

1571 Wolf Binder, Hans Missel were executed
In 1571 at Scharding in Bavaria, a brother named Wolf Binder was
taken prisoner for the sake of his faith. He was traveling with a sister who
was bringing her children from Bavaria, and on their way back to the
community they took a riverboat. On the same boat was a man name Kurz,
a citizen of Mühldorf. When they reached Scharding, this man betrayed
them to the chancellor of Burghausen, who just happened to be at
Scharding. The chancellor came in person to take brother Wolf prisoner
and tied him up in the usual way. The sister (whose name was Margret)
escaped, but she had to leave her children behind, which was a grief to her
for the rest of her life.
Brother Wolf was taken to Burghausen, where he had to withstand
many attempts by the rabble of false prophets and other worldly-wise men
to make him recant.
When the priests' efforts failed, it was the executioner's turn. He
seized brother Wolf and tortured and racked him with such brutality that
the sun could have shone through him. His hands were so badly swollen
that they looked as if they were cut at the joints. He was torn and
mistreated until he could not stand on his feet, let alone walk.
From Burghausen they sent him back to Scharding. After enduring
great suffering with unshaken courage, he was executed by the sword.
We still have a short song that tells the story of Wolf Binder. *
In this year 1571 brother Hans Missel, a weaver who was still a young
man, was taken prisoner at Langenschemmern in Swabia, a village in the
jurisdiction of Warthausen. He had read and sung with the people who had
sheltered him, for they wished to hear his witness to the truth of God. Then
he was betrayed.
The lady of the place, a widow, sent her scribe to fetch the constables.
Those sons of Pilate seized Hans at Schemmer and took him to

Warthausen. As he remained firm, refusing to deny the divine truth in spite
of great pressure from the false priests, he was executed with the sword.
God let wonderful signs be seen at his execution and these are described in
a song. **
***************

1573 Kasper Braitmichel first writer of the chronicle passed
away
On February 27, 1573, brother Kaspar Braitmichel, an old servant of
God's Word and his church, fell asleep in the Lord at Austerlitz in
Moravia. He had suffered much for the sake of truth. He was one of the
brothers who were taken from Falkenstein or Steinebrunn to the sea but
returned. Later he shared in the church community's suffering during the
years of intense persecution. We still have a few of his songs. He was the
brother who began writing this chronicle, as told in the beginning of this
book. *
***************

1574 Hans Plattner executed and burned
In the year 1574 at Rotholz in the Inn Valley, brother Hans Plattner or
Passeier, a tailor, was imprisoned for the sake of divine truth. As he would
not waver he was condemned to death, executed with the sword, and then
burned.
***************

1576 Ott Niederlander's false ideas

In the year 1576, Ott Niederlander, a man whose high opinion of
himself led him to spiritual pride and opposition to the church, wrote a
letter in his own hand to the servant of the Lord and his church, Peter
Walpot. He maintained that through his faith in Christ not only the
depravity of sin was taken from him, but even the inclination to sin, for
the Scriptures tell us that sin should no longer rule in believing members.
Yet, he said, in the church's Confession of Faith and in some of our
teachings exactly the opposite was taught: namely, sinful inclinations will
not harm a believer as long as he does not follow them but fights against
them to the end.
When he had heard that a person must fight against the flesh, he, too,
had taken up the fight. The more he strove, the more those evil
inclinations rose up in him, and - according to him - are what defile and
corrupt a man. Therefore, when in meetings the attempt was made to point
out to him his sinful state, this only strengthened the evil in him. Telling
him that this inclination does not harm a person, actually weakened his
determination to resist the nature of Adam within him. Such teaching, he
said, provides an excuse for the weaker members of the church.
Hypocrites and other presumptuous people can live according to the
Scriptures, he continued, but their hearts are not pure. That is why they
agree on these points as though speaking with one voice. Yet what makes
Christians any different from other people, if they still have an occasional
inclination to evil and must overcome it in order to attain salvation? They
are just like the philosophers who teach that to conquer oneself is the
highest virtue. Paul warns against such teaching, for if people can live
rightly by their own efforts, without God, they nullify the power of Christ.
Ott objected that some were urging others to be baptized, saying that
anyone who is baptized is at peace with God, while one who is not
baptized is not at peace or devout; this often resulted in someone coming
to baptism without good reason and then leaving without good reason.
He claimed that we baptize people in other places, people who have
never seen the church community. They are told how wonderful everything
is among the brothers and sisters. But when they join the community, they

find just the opposite: They find irresponsible and unredeemed people just
like themselves whose corrupt nature has not yet been sanctified. They
seek peace among those who have no peace. What they find is quarreling,
anger, envy, backbiting, lustful looks.
As if the person who did such things in the community would not be
found and punished! Yet because such people exist, Ott claimed that the
church must be at fault. But that is a wrong conclusion.
Since he refused to be corrected by the elders and turn from his error,
he was called before the brotherhood and his letter was read out in his
presence. The brothers pointed out his recent whoring and fornication, for
which he had only just repented. This and other things showed clearly to
what extent he had in reality been freed from the flesh and the inclination
to sin! He answered that he had not long been in this new state, but had
only recently entered it.
He found a different interpretation of passages in the apostles' letters
where they deplore their weakness: Paul says that Satan's messenger had
boxed his ears to keep him from becoming too proud and that he had
prayed three times to God, receiving the answer, My grace is sufficient for
you, for my power is made perfect in weakness. (2 Corinthians 12:9) This
passage, Ott said, should be understood in this way, that ungodly people
had struck Paul on the head and these were the messengers of Satan. A
brother challenged him about this in front of the brotherhood, but Ott said
the brother was more in the wrong than he was.
His ideas, however, were opposed to the Holy Scriptures, in which the
great apostle Paul says, I know that nothing good dwells in me, that is, in
my flesh, and I find another law in my members that opposes the law of
God in my inmost self, and there are similar passages elsewhere. (Romans
7:18) As Ott was immovable and his heart and mind were already
separated from the brotherhood, he was excluded and separated from the
church. This took place at Neumühl.
This is recorded so that we can see in how many ways the devil
prowls around the house of God, how slyly he seduces those he finds and
then devours them. All of us should know what to watch out for, and

particularly the watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem should be on guard
against the devil's guile and unexpected onslaughts.
***************

1576 Brothers released, Paul Glock in time for daughter's
marriage
In this year 1576 three brothers were released from a long
imprisonment, returning in peace to the church. They were received with
great joy. One brother, a clockmaker named Veit Grünberger, had been
imprisoned at Salzburg. Paul Glock and Matthias Binder or Schneider, a
servant of God's Word and his church, had been in prison in Württemberg.
Veit Uhrmacher had been in his seventh year of imprisonment at
Salzburg, and had often disputed with the priests. He sent the church a
copy of his answers refuting the priests at his hearing, but we do not have
it anymore.
Brother Paul Glock, also called young Paul, was in prison for
nineteen consecutive years in Württemberg, mostly in Hohenwittlingen
Castle. Matthias Binder was imprisoned for four years and released with
Paul Glock.
Their experiences during their long imprisonment, their confession
and defense of their faith, and their suffering for the sake of divine truth
are told in greater detail in their letters and songs for they both, and
especially Paul Glock, wrote many letters home to the church and
composed many songs.
Paul Glock's letters fill a small book which I, Johannes Waldner, once
saw at Kreuz. It was taken back to Alwinz, however, and has since been
lost. Now we have only one of his letters left - a letter he wrote to his wife,
Else. We have a number of his songs. I have never seen a letter of Mathias
Binder's, only one of his songs.

A story is still told of an amazing coincidence in Paul Glock's life. It
is said that his wife Else had just given birth to a little daughter when he
was sent out by the church. He was then captured and imprisoned for
nineteen years. On his return to the church he found a wedding was taking
place and his own daughter was one of those married. So he arrived for the
wedding of his daughter who had been born at the time of his departure.
A song about the release of these three brothers was written in praise
to God. We have this song and it is still sung among us.
***************

1577 Comet
In November 1577, a remarkably bright comet appeared in the
heavens and was visible for several weeks. It was first observed in the
evening of November 13, the Wednesday after Martinmas, and set at about
eight o'clock.
For six weeks it rose higher and stayed longer every night, although
less brilliant.
***************

1578 Peter Walpot fell asleep in the Lord
On Sunday, January 26, 1578, about the time this comet faded, dear
Brother Peter Walpot, a faithful servant of Jesus Christ and his whole
church, fell ill.
At 7 o'clock in the morning of the 29th, shortly before his end, he
spoke to the elders for the last time. He warned and encouraged them,
speaking with warmth and clarity, although it was hard in his extreme
weakness. After he had been raised a little in his bed, he spoke as follows:

Dear brothers, as far as I know, I have always feared God and served
the church faithfully and my conscience is free from all sins. Even though
I, like everyone else, have always been saddened at my weaknesses, in
good conscience I have always wanted to live faithfully and uprightly.
Now, as I sense that my life may be ending and the Lord may call me
home, it is to you dear brothers that I entrust the church, asking you to
make sure that it is in good hands. I do not need to suggest a brother to
you. The one shown to you by the Lord and his church will bring you more
assurance and joy than any man suggested by one individual.
In any case, watch faithfully over the church, for you know that it is
no small task, but a mighty one, that the Lord has laid upon you.
Therefore, seek always to make sound judgments and decisions in the
church's affairs. Do not be too lenient in disciplining one person while
being too hard on another or disciplining one while closing your eyes to
another, lest you destroy the people of God.
Let your special care be for the needy and the young and for the
widows and orphans. Since there are many ungodly people around who are
hostile to us, take care not to get involved with them or become too
compliant, but manage things fairly and properly.
If I have ever hurt or offended anyone in any way, I ask for
forgiveness. On the many occasions when we had to talk matters over,
whatever I said or did was meant well and done out of a zeal for God.
I can hardly speak anymore, I am so weak, but I am fully confident
that the Lord will not abandon his church. He will continue to provide and
will raise up another dedicated brother to care for you. Only persevere in
the teaching and be a good example to the people. The Lord will give you
his blessing, grace, and strength. And pray the Lord for me that he will
take me home soon.
The brothers bore him witness that he had served the church
faithfully, and he asked them to take leave of all the faithful in his name
and give them his blessing. After speaking these words to them he fell
asleep in the Lord at about a quarter to five in the morning on the next day,

January 30. He was fully conscious to the end and often expressed the wish
that the church be under God's protection.
Peter Walpot was almost sixty years old, and the church had been
entrusted to him for thirteen years, after brother Leonhard Lanzenstiel had
departed this life. He had carried the service of the Word for thirty-six
years.
He was a faithful shepherd, an outstanding teacher, and a godly leader
of the whole church; a man with much experience in all matters, who got
along well with people, friendly and humble toward everyone, but stern
when necessary. Above all, he was richly gifted with God's Word and
teaching, bringing joy and strengthening to the church. His passing was a
great pain and loss to the church.
***************

1578 Hans Kräl appointed elder
In the week following dear Peter Walpot's death, the whole church
asked God in earnest prayer that he raise up and show them by unanimous
testimony another devout and dedicated man, one whom he himself
wished to have as a shepherd of his people, so that the church might be
cared for in these troubled times. On February 5, 1578, almost all the
servants of the Word and servants for temporal needs, as well as many
brothers from all the various church communities, met at Neumühl to take
counsel in the fear of the Lord. They all gave the same witness that in
answer to their united prayer, God showed them that brother Hans Kräl
should lead the church.
Then the assembled brothers (with earnest intercession for God's help
and grace) laid upon Hans Kräl the care of the whole church, to watch over
it and lead it in the Lord. They, in turn, would be obedient to him in
accordance with God's will and with God's help. The church gave praise to
God for this. Though brother Hans begged to be spared this burden if at all
possible, it could not be. So he declared himself ready with God's help to

do his utmost in all faithfulness. Everyone then went back home, pleased
with the outcome.
***************

1578 Two Brothers betrayed, tortured but escaped
Around St. Margaret's Day [June 10] two young brothers, Andreas
Schlosser and Adam Schneider, were betrayed and arrested at Ötting in
Bavaria as they were traveling down the Inn River with a small group from
Tirol. The very first day of their imprisonment the warden, the counsel,
and the priests started their interrogation and spoke with the brothers
twice. They were chiefly concerned with baptism and why the brothers
rejected the first baptism, meaning infant baptism.
Their interrogators tried to make the brothers recant, but without
success. So they took them to be tortured and racked, each of them twice,
with a priest standing by as they were pulled up. With upraised hands he
pleaded with them to be converted, to recant, and to submit and not let
their young bodies be ruined in this way. But they refused, saying they
were founded in the truth of God and would remain firm. Finally, as
nothing had been achieved, they were let down from the rack.
One of those present at the hearing said, Well, if you are men like the
apostles, why aren't you freed from your prison and chains like the
apostles? Why doesn't God help you as he helped Daniel in the lions' den?
The warden said, Let me tell you, fire and burning will be your end if
you don't give in.
The official from Burghausen said, I will speak plainly to you. The
executioner (in whom they all put their faith) is coming soon. And the
brothers were put back in chains.
God, however, wanted to help them escape, and it occurred to
Schlosser, who was a locksmith, that if only he had a nail he could undo

both of his locks. Then if the outer door, which separated him from his
fellow prisoner Adam and had a huge lock, was left unfastened just once,
he could free his brother as well.
As he was thinking this, it happened that he found a nail sticking out
in the prison wall, and that same night the jailer forgot to shut the outer
door. Seeing that things were falling into place, he prayed to the Lord to
help him if that were his will and pleasure. If not, he would gladly bear his
punishment and cross. Then he tried and was able to force both locks. He
went in to his fellow prisoner Adam, saying, Pray to the Lord while I work
at your locks and see if I can open that, too. For a long time he could not
do it and was almost in despair, telling his brother Adam, I will never be
happy again if I have to leave you behind. Finally he said, I will try once
more, and if it is God's will for us to escape, the lock will open. If it is not
his will, it will not open now either.
While he worked on the lock, the other prayed, and before long it
opened. He had undone four locks, three of them with two bolts each. The
brothers came out on the town wall just by the prison. There they prayed,
asking God for further help since he had already given them so much.
They climbed down as well as they could, scrambling and falling. At the
bottom, they praised God for his wonderful help at every turn. At that very
moment the heavens opened with a brilliant flash of lightning.
By these means God showed them as well as their enemies that he can
still release his own from prison as in the days of the apostles. Their
enemies had intended to make short work of them and take their lives, but
God had a different plan and, to their enemies' great amazement, freed
them from their grasp. Joyfully, the brothers returned to the church, still
faithful and with good consciences. Praise the Lord!
***************

1579 Jesuits came to Nikolsburg

In the year 1579, the Jesuits, that evil brood of vipers or locusts
foretold in the Revelation of John, found their way to Nikolsburg, too,
under Lord Adam, Count von Dietrichstein, chief tutor of His Majesty the
Holy Roman Emperor. They took it upon themselves to bring the whole
district of Nikolsburg to the popish faith, to reinstate the mass and all the
antichristian abominations and idolatry.
Our brothers on the Nikolsburg estates suffered greatly because they
would not take their hats off to these Jesuits, who had made a point of
demanding it, so insolent were they in their pride. Many brothers were
knocked to the ground for not taking their hats off to the Jesuits. They
even put our schoolmaster from Pergen in the stocks for two and a half
days. His hands and feet were put in irons and in his mouth they tied a gag
smeared with a bitter substance, because they had heard him say, They
don't act like the religious people they claim to be.
Our steward at Pergen was put in the dungeon in Nikolsburg for
several days, in the cold of winter, on account of a boy who had joined the
brothers and whose father was at Pergen, although the steward had no part
in it.
These Jesuits were always trying to find something against us,
bringing many complaints to the count. They threatened his subjects with
imprisonment and fines, forcing them to take part in their abominable
idolatry, mass, and ungodly practices. But we in no way gave in.
In this year 1579, four brothers, Joseph Schlosser, Matthias
Wagenknecht, Bärtel Rader, and Bärtel Schneider, were taken prisoner at
Kaibel in the kingdom of Poland. They were betrayed, and officials and
nobility with their servants surrounded the house, arrested them, and led
them away, vowing in their fury that they would make an example of them
as a warning to others. Their captors were pleased to have finally laid
hands on the brothers - they had wanted to do that for a long time. Now
they behaved as if they had a fortune. They put the brothers in the stocks
with iron fetters. It was not long before the wind changed, however, and
their captors began to feel uneasy, wishing they had never set eyes on the
brothers, for they were struck in their consciences as these prisoners
answered fearlessly and were obviously without guilt.

When the enemies of truth had exhausted all their efforts, all four
brothers were released.
In this year of 1579, the community went through much suffering
because of a new tax of four groschen imposed on every person in the
country over sixteen years of age. We could not pay it as it was for war
purposes, and thus not in accord with our faith in Christ, who demands a
peaceful people. So we were the object of much hostility from the lords in
Moravia, who sent their servants to count the people in our houses and
took the tax accordingly in oxen, cows, sheep, and other livestock. Some
took it from what they owed us for our work. We could only lay it all
before the Lord our God and rather suffer robbery than willingly give
anything and defile our consciences.
In this year 1579, the Lord of Lundenburg furiously ordered us to
leave all his estates within two weeks. This came about because we
refused to pay his unjust taxes. While we were preparing for the move, he
asked us to stay.
In 1579, in the week before St. Gall's Day [Oct. 16] two brothers, a
smith called Hans Zuckenhammer and a tailor named Wolf were captured
in the diocese of Salzburg. They were with a smith near Polzing when two
constables entered the house with drawn weapons, seized the brothers, and
struck Zuckenhammer so hard that blood flowed. After binding the
brothers so tightly that Zuckenhammer's hands turned purple, these
constables brought them to the next village on the way to Fridolfing.
Priests soon came hurrying to dispute with them about baptism, the mass,
and original sin.
Then they were taken from Fridolfing to the town of Tittmoning,
where they were first brought to the judge's house and were crossexamined the very same day. As they would not give the answers their
questioners wanted to hear, they were taken to the castle. Brother Wolf
was put in a cell and his feet fastened in the stocks with nine locks.
Zuckenhammer was secured with seven locks. They had to face intensive
questioning as clergy and laymen attempted to find out where the brothers
preached and taught, and who sheltered them; but the brothers would not
tell, although they were threatened with execution by fire and the sword.

After they had been sixteen weeks in prison with nothing gained from
them, an order for their release arrived from the bishop of Salzburg. They
were given their freedom, walked out of the town in broad daylight, and
came home to the church.
Two songs were written about this story, to be sung to God's honor,
for they witness to what God has done. Praise be for all the wonderful
things he does for his people! *
***************

1580 Severe epidemic hit German lands
On August 6, 1580, brother Veit Denniffel, a servant for temporal
affairs, passed away at Wostitz in the severe epidemic which had begun
about St. James' Day [July 25]. The illness started with coughing, sore
throat, and headache. Hardly any escaped it, and many died. Similar news
came from all the German lands.
This same year, the new tax was increased, so everyone who stayed in
one place for more than ten years had to pay one gulden. This is against
our faith and conscience, because a Christian should not knowingly
support anything that takes men's lives in war and vengeance. It makes
little difference whether we fight with our own hands or support someone
in our stead by paying taxes; to help by handing over money would be the
same as going in person - in God's eyes it is the same thing. Therefore, to
keep our consciences free of blood guilt and other terrible crimes and to
avoid participating in the sin of another, we do not pay such taxes. So
again this year in many places the lords came and seized our oxen, horses,
and other livestock, or they deducted the tax amount from our wages. We
had to let them rob us of what was ours; but God will be their judge.
***************

1581 Refusal to help at a wedding
In the year 1581 we had to leave Wostitz, where we had lived for
eleven years, because Count Franz von Thurn at Pürschitz ordered us off
his estates. It all started because our brothers and sisters at Wostitz, though
owing him service as his tenants, refused to help at a wedding banquet (to
which he had invited many noblemen.) The housekeeper, who was one of
our sisters, refused to go and prepare the hens and geese or have anything
to do with it.
We have to refuse such service because it is against the true Christian
faith. It would burden our consciences to assist at weddings and banquets
where there is no thought of God, only indulgence in the lusts of the flesh,
luxurious living, ostentation, and excessive eating and drinking.
What God has created is abused. The people celebrate with dancing
and every kind of wild gaiety, altogether unchristian and opposed to God.
Therefore, we do not help at such occasions; we avoid them, in order
not to become equally guilty in the sins and evils of others and to keep our
consciences pure and unblemished.
Not that we despise Marriage, but we cannot tolerate the sinful
conduct that accompanies these occasions.
The count was roused to fury by this, and the countess said, Do I have
to put up with servants who do not obey me? I won't have it. I would
sooner not be called mistress! Thereupon he promised on his honor that he
would not have us anymore.
Moreover, he was incited by his chaplain, who warned him to heed
his own conscience and the thought of divine punishment and not to
tolerate us on his estates. Looking for further reasons to expel us, they
accused us of teaching our people not to acknowledge any magisterial
authority.
We were accused of preaching against the Ten Commandments, the
Lord's Prayer, and the Christian faith, and against Christian baptism and

the Lord's Supper. They even maintained that we were fellow believers
with the Münsterites.
We made our defense to the count in writing and orally, but our words
were of no help because the count had already committed himself. So we
moved out of Wostitz - old people, widows, orphans, and little children.
We had to give up our houses, farm buildings, fields, vineyards, and
property, which we had built up with the sweat of our brows. All this had
to be sold with considerable loss.
In this year 1581, His Imperial Majesty Emperor Rudolf II had been
suffering from a dangerous disease for a long time, unable to make any
recovery, although many famous medical doctors from Italy, Spain, and
other countries attended him.
Finally he sent for our doctor, brother Georg Zobel, to come to him at
Prague in Bohemia.
The emperor listened to his advice, accepted the treatment he
suggested, and recovered. Through God's help he grew well and strong.
Our doctor Zobel, who attended him for six months, was then sent home
with a friendly farewell. Some nobles said the emperor would have died if
our doctor had not come. *
In that year we had to leave Sabatisch in Hungary, where we had been
for thirty-five years. We had to depart without being able to sell our
dwellings, farm buildings, fields or our one third share in the mill. This
was because of the many problems that made it impossible for us to live
there any longer. The lords of the place owed us a great deal of money for
our work. Each of the many lords wanted our craftsmen to work
exclusively for him. If we were not ready to work for credit, their servants
grew angry, beat us, and sometimes even took away our products without
paying at all. So we moved out. In the end we were allowed to take most of
what we had in the houses. Ten years later we returned to Sabatisch.
***************

1582 Heinrich Sommer and Jakob Mändel drowned
In the year 1582 we bought the large house at Schakwitz again and
for the third time began a community there.
In the first weeks of September of this year, our dear and faithful
brother Heinrich Sommer or Müller was captured at Zurzach in
Switzerland; he was an appointed servant of God's Word, still in a time of
testing. With him was Brother Jakob Mändel. Both were arrested for the
sake of divine truth. They were taken to the town of Baden and given a
public hearing by the governor and court of justice in the town hall. In the
presence of many people, the brothers were questioned about their faith, to
which they witnessed and gave unwavering testimony. As they refused to
recant, they were condemned to death and drowned. Their story was put
into song. *
***************

1583 Hans Kräl passed away
On the Saturday before Martinmas [Nov. 11 ] 1583, dear brother
Hans Kräl, who was entrusted with the care of the whole church, was taken
sick. When he realized he might be nearing his end (which he was longing
for), he called for the elders, who had come to visit him in his illness. He
asked them to take faithful care of the Lord's church - of the widows and
orphans and all the believers. The Lord had bought them at great cost, so
the brothers should hold them equally precious, always doing their utmost
to give sound judgments. They should hold zealously to Christian
community and not abandon the established order of the church.
He asked them to give his last greetings of love in the peace of the
Lord to all the faithful and say farewell to the whole church. He
commended the church to the almighty God, because he must now leave

this world. Whoever might be shown by the Lord to take his place would
also be given grace for this task.
Hans Kräl also asked them to give the brothers this message from
him: that no one should hold anything against him; for to be sure, anyone
in his position often has to act as need or urgency requires and is not
always able to please everybody. His longing was for us all to remain
faithful to the divine truth until the end.
So having said these last words in the night, and remaining conscious
and clear until the end, he fell peacefully asleep in the Lord between five
and six in the morning on November 14, at the age of sixty-three. The
whole church had been entrusted to his care for six years, but he had been
a servant of the Word for twenty-three years. He was very warmhearted
and devout and had suffered greatly for the sake of his faith in divine
truth, as recorded earlier.
***************

1583 Klaus Braidl appointed elder
After dear brother Hans Kräl's departure, the whole church implored
God (who knows the hearts of men), now that he had taken this brother
from us, to show by unanimous testimony another brother who was
pleasing to him. On November 19, all the elders in the service of the Word,
the servants for temporal needs, and many other brothers from all the
communities of the whole church, assembled at Neumühl. They took
counsel together in the fear of God to consider which of the elders should
be given the burden of leading the Lord's church. It is indeed so heavy and
great a task that the Lord Christ himself asked the apostle Peter three
times whether he loved him before entrusting the guarding and feeding of
his flock to him.
When the assembled brothers had earnestly considered it before God,
the Lord gave them a united, joyful testimony for brother Klaus Braidl. He
had been in the service of God's Word for almost twenty-one years, and it

was felt the Lord had been with him. The care of the whole church was
laid on him, entrusted to him as from God the Lord, so that as a shepherd
he would promote the honor of God's name and the welfare and
blessedness of God's people. He was to work for justice and righteousness,
yes, for divine truth in the church, to guard and to watch against all
inroads of evil. He and his assistants should intervene wherever the
abomination of desolation attempted to break in. Through the Word of God
he was to direct the church that the Lord had purchased through the
precious blood of Christ; he was to keep the elders and the people of Israel
gathered in love, peace, unity, Christian community, and all divine
commandments, as the one who must give account to God.
Brother Klaus was dismayed at being named, for he did not consider
himself equal to such a great task. He would much rather have been spared
the burden of it, but it was laid upon him by the whole church, in the
presence of God, and this he could not oppose. Therefore he offered
himself in obedience to the Lord to do all he could until his death, with the
help of God in heaven. He earnestly requested the church to pray for him
that the almighty God might clothe him with grace and gifts for the task
and be with him always. The church interceded fervently for him.
Afterward the elders and assembled brothers shook hands with him,
accepting him as a special gift from the Lord. They praised God as they
returned home, commended to divine protection.
In 1583, brother Melchior Platzer, a former apothecary, was taken
prisoner for the sake of his faith at the village of Rankweil (belonging to
Innsbruck, though in the jurisdiction of Feldkirch, the domain of Count
Hannibal). Melchior was immediately put in irons at Rankweil and taken
to a deep dungeon in the castle at Feldkirch, from where he was repeatedly
brought before the officials and priests. He was always prepared to witness
to his faith, steadily opposing their false teaching.
From Feldkirch he was sent back to Rankweil, where he had been
captured. There he was brought before the court on orders from Count
Hannibal, since the prince in Innsbruck had handed the case back and left
it up to him. The verdict was death, and on November 6, he was executed
with the sword.

***************

1584 Taxes were abated by the Diet at Olmütz
On July 13, 1584, taxes were abated by the Diet at Olmutz. Lord
Hynek von Waldstein at Birtnitz, governor of Moravia, and all the nobles
and representatives assembled for the Diet decided these taxes should not
be demanded of us but should be abated. We heartily thanked God for his
intervention. The church community had long been troubled by conscience
questions over these taxes. We had explained this many times to the lords
and stated clearly that we could never consent to pay. We were ready to
give notice on their estates and suffer hardship rather than let them
continue taking these taxes from us as they had been doing - because when
we refused to pay, they deducted them from what they owed us.
This tax abatement lasted barely six months, however. Afterwards
oxen, cows, hogs, wine, and other commodities were seized and taken as
before.
In this year 1584 on May 26, the dear, faithful brother Andreas
Pürcher, a tilemaker by trade, was captured in Latsch, a village in his
native Vintschgau, and taken to Goldrain. Here he was brutally racked
three times to make him reveal where he had lodged and in whose house.
From the first he staunchly answered that, come what may, he would not
be like Judas and betray people who had treated him kindly.
He was transferred from Goldrain to Schlanders and sentenced to
death under the old imperial and royal mandates. Then he was handed over
to the executioner, who took him to the place of execution at Schantzen
and beheaded him. He had been in prison twenty-two weeks. *
***************

1585 Four brothers were imprisoned and executed

In 1585, four brothers were imprisoned at Burghausen in Bavaria for
the sake of their faith.
One was called Leonhard Summerauer, another, Wolf Rauffer, the
third, Georg Pruckmaier, and the fourth, Hans Aichner. All four witnessed
to the divine truth with great joy and constancy as we learn from a song
about them, and all four brothers were executed with the sword on August
13 at Ried in Bavaria. *
***************

1586 Several hundred Swiss people came to the church
In 1586 brother Christian Gasteiger was imprisoned at Ingolstadt in
Bavaria. He was held there for twelve weeks and had to endure many
attacks on his faith. Then he was taken to Munich. As he remained
steadfast he was executed by the sword on September 13.
This same year several hundred people from Switzerland joined the
community. On the one day, October 9, 402 people, adults and children,
arrived at Neumühl and Schakwitz to be divided between the two
communities, and on the 14th of October, 249 people came to Stignitz.
Many had been forced to move because of the famine, but they wanted to
accept the faith and change their lives. We took them in with this same
hope and agreed to try it with them.
***************

1587 Brother Michael Fischer executed
About Whitsun 1587, brother Michael Fischer was taken prisoner at
Ingolstadt in Bavaria for the sake of the faith. For twelve weeks he was
chained in prison while monks, Jesuits, and others tried their utmost to
convert him, but he would not listen to their false teaching and idolatry.

On the contrary, he courageously persevered in the way of God's truth. In
the end he was condemned to death and was executed with the sword on
August 7.
***************

1588 Community at VelkÈ Lev·re was begun
In 1588, brother Peter Saimer was captured at Freiburg, a market
town in Bavaria. He was taken to Burghausen and given a hearing. When it
became obvious that he would remain steadfast, he was sent back to
Freiburg. Three days later, the judge's staff was broken above his head' and
he was executed with the sword. This took place on July 8. *
In this year the community at Velké Leváre in Hungary was begun
and also the community at Kobelitz. **
***************

1589 Forced to leave Paradtitz because of war taxes
In 1589 Stoffel Schenck, from Rehag in the Bern area, in
Switzerland, became our brother. Formerly a servant of the Word among
the Swiss Brethren, he joined our church community with his people.
This year we had to leave Paradtitz, where we had been living for
many years. The lady of the estate would not pay us for the work we had
done in her vineyard and wanted to deduct the war taxes from our wages.
In the end she ordered us to leave and took our house away from us.
***************

1590 More conflicts over war taxes
For the sake of conscience we could not pay the usual taxes insofar
as they were levied for war or frontier posts, so the authorities confiscated
livestock, wine, and chattels instead. After this had gone on for some
years, they themselves grew tired of it and of our protesting and
complaining.
Several lords who had asked us this question before, asked again that
we on our part tell them what we could do in accordance with our
consciences. They said we would surely realize that since we enjoyed the
benefits of the country and could practice our trades, they could not
exempt us completely. If a large group such as ours were to pay nothing at
all, that would place a burden on the Provincial Diet. We should think it
over.
Since we had been asked many times to do something for the country
that would not be against our consciences, we considered what to do, as we
did not want to be a burden to the Provincial Diet. There were many more
of us living in Moravia now, and we made much more of a difference to
the country than in previous years when we were fewer in number. Now we
had to buy large quantities of grain and wood, as well as other things. We
knew this made a considerable demand on the Provincial Diet. Therefore
the elders and brothers from all our places met to consult whether we
could give something for the good of the country that was not a question
of conscience. We unanimously felt that it was only fair, as we benefited
from the country, that we should also contribute something to the
Provincial Diet, with the reservations, however, stated in the following
letter to Lord Friedrich von Zerotin at Seelowitz, who had brought the
matter forward on behalf of the Provincial Diet.
***************

1590 Letter to the Provincial Diet about yearly taxes

We wish His Lordship now and always everything good from the
almighty God! His Lordship realizes our difficulties in regard to paying
taxes, and other lords on whose land we live are troubled (like His
Lordship himself) at having to take our horses, oxen, and other things
instead, as has been happening for some time. They see this as lamentable,
which it certainly is, and have requested us to find some other way to help
the country that is not against our consciences. We considered this
seriously, for we do not want to be a burden, and for the good of the
country we will gladly do something.
Our greatest fear, however (and we beg His Lordship not to take it
amiss), is that only the name but not the tax would be changed, so that we
would be led into it before we back out. If we then discovered that it was
used for war or for other purposes we oppose, this would distress us
greatly. If it should come to this, we would prefer to have our goods and
chattels taken as before rather than in any way support deeds of vengeance
and so stain our consciences. We say this in the fear of God, for we pay no
taxes for vengeance, nor do we give anything as substitute for such taxes.
We can give only what would serve to the country's good in some other
way, as we realize that we enjoy the benefits of the country and are
allowed to buy the grain we need wherever it is available. We cannot buy
enough in the market places because the people would protest.
Further, we would be glad if the lords would graciously allow us to
continue to brew beer for our own use, as before.
In order not to encumber the country, to support ourselves by our own
trades, and obtain our food here, we would be willing to pay an annual sum
on each house where we have a common kitchen, as long as we can be
assured that the money will be used profitably for the country and for
people in need. God knows that we would do whatever we can to avoid
being a burden to anyone.
Yet we would ask that the sum not be higher than we can afford to pay
and that it not be increased, because we have among us many sick, weak,
and disabled people to care for. We must also expect times of distress, for
we do not know what God may allow to come upon us as a test of our
faith. As we may have to move out of our houses or be driven from them

into destitution, we cannot bind ourselves to make these payments. But
since we are so often reproached with enjoying the benefits of the country
without being willing to do anything for it, we thought it necessary to
write our answer to His Lordship in all good faith. We are not opposed to
doing our part if it can be done in God's name and without damage to our
consciences. We wish to offer our help in whatever serves a good cause, to
the best of our ability and as long as God grants it.
It is our humble request that His Lordship will not be displeased at
our simple statement but will present our case to the Diet on our behalf.
Plead with them on our behalf to have patience with us, for we have been
driven into this land as strangers for the sake of our faith. We want to be
patient, remaining hopeful and praying without ceasing that God will grant
peace to our governing authorities and to Moravia, so that we, in their
peace, may also experience peace. May God grant it. With this we wish
His Lordship happiness and well-being.
Dated Neumühl, May 14, 1590
From the elders of the Church that men call Hutterian
***************

1590 12 gulden tax imposed on us
As a result the Provincial Diet imposed a yearly tax of twelve gulden
on each of our houses that cooked in one kitchen. Half the sum, six gulden,
was to be paid on St. Bartholomew's Day (Aug. 24), and the other half on
St. Nicholas' Day (Dec. 6), beginning in the year 1590. In 1593, the
Provincial Diet demanded an extra eight gulden, making twenty gulden for
each house with a kitchen.
Later, in 1595, the Diet at Brunn decided we should pay ten gulden in
addition to the twenty which we had agreed to pay. Also, whether our
millers were employed in the lords' mills for wages or under contract, or
whether they worked at our own mills on large or small streams, they had

to pay one gulden for each mill wheel. Wherever we worked a mill for a
third or quarter share, the tax was seven silver pennies for each mill wheel.
We were unable to pay these mill taxes because they were imposed in
wartime and we knew they would go toward the war.
The above mentioned twenty gulden tax that we had agreed to pay on
our houses, on the other hand, had been required for the benefit of the
Provincial Diet in peacetime.
The taxes did not remain at this level for long. In 1602 the Diet at
Brünn again increased them sharply. Eighty gulden were added to the
twenty we had agreed to pay, as well as five groschen on each barrel of
beer brewed. There were also (as before) two groschen on every cask of
homemade wine, one groschen on every shock of summer or winter grain,
and other impositions. As this money, too, was required for war purposes,
the church community could not pay it for conscience's sake, so sheep,
hogs, oxen, grain, and much else were taken in payment from this
community and that.
Taxes continued to be levied in this way until all the communities
were driven from Moravia in 1622.
***************

1591 Expulsion from Schenkof
On January 18, 1591, Hynek Slach of Hrivice evicted us from his
property, Schenkhof. Our people could not even take clothing or bedding
with them.
All the horses, cows, sheep, and other stock were taken as well as
household goods, kitchen equipment, wagons, harness, and the seed
already sown in the fields. We estimated that the losses we suffered came
to over 5,000 gulden. We had to bear with this and leave it in God's hands.

On March 8 of this year 1591, brother Leonhard Boltzinger, a
clockmaker by trade, was executed for his faith in Christ. This took place
at Julbach, a market town not far from Braunau in Bavaria.
That same year there was a famine, especially in Bohemia, and as a
great deal of grain was exported from Moravia, there was a shortage and
many people were hungry in this country too. But praise be to God! He
thought of his people and had given their elders such foresight that their
bread supply was never low enough to cause actual want.
On May 7, 1591, our two communities had to move from
Voitelsbrunn' and Pergen, and we also had to leave the farm at Pulgram.
The brotherhood had been living at these places for more than thirty years.
On August 5, of this year 1591, brother Georg Wenger, a tailor, was
beheaded for his faith at St. Lorenzen in the Puster Valley in the county of
Tirol.
On June 19, Jakob Platzer was also executed with the sword for faith's
sake at Sillian in the Puster Valley, Tirol.
***************

1592 Thoman Haan captured & executed
On May 12 in the year 1592, brother Thoman Haan was captured and
put in prison at Freiburg in Bavaria for the sake of his faith. After he had
been in prison for six weeks and showed no sign of recanting, he was
brought out on June 18, and the judge's staff was broken over his head. He
was executed with the sword and burned.
Songs about these three brothers' are still preserved and sung in the
church community and give details of their unwavering resistance. *
In this same year on July 1, brother Michael Hasel passed away with
peaceful heart in prison at Hohenwittlingen in Württemberg. Because of

his faith in Christ he had been in prison for over four years.
On July 27, 1592, brother Matthias Mair was drowned at Baden in
Switzerland for the sake of his faith and his witness to Jesus Christ.
***************

1593 Turkish War begins in Croatia
In 1593, when the Turkish war began in Croatia, many soldiers
passed through the country, taking horses, oxen, and other things. In
Neumühl a brother called Heinrich Schmidt was shot to death through the
gate. That was the beginning of a time of great tribulation.
The elders of the church recognized that in this time of need, we
should persevere in prayer more fervently than ever. Whenever the
servants of the Word could arrange it, every day, either during the day or in
the evening, we should unite in prayer, humbly asking God to remember
us and help us, for there is no one else in the whole world upon whom we
can rely. We should pray that even if we suffer loss of temporal goods, he
might keep our souls from harm and our people from suffering violence
and dishonor; that he might protect us all - the widows and orphans, the
many inexperienced young people, and our wives and children - from the
bloodthirsty tyrant, the enemy of Christ; that he might keep us from being
dispersed or sold among the heathen, from being drawn into their
blasphemous and unchristian way of life.
If God uses the bloodthirsty tyrant to punish those who call
themselves Christians (but whose lives are opposed to Christ through their
shameful sodomy, terrible sins, and blasphemy), we should pray that he
might give his people, who fear him and hope in him alone, special help
such as only he can give - and has given wonderfully from the beginning
of the world.
In short, we should pray that God might rescue us unstained from all
enemies of divine truth and not let his people suffer punishment for the

ungodly life these enemies lead. Therefore, the brothers and sisters were
enjoined to look to God and sigh to him in prayer, not only together in
meetings but whenever they could, individually.
We experienced that God heard his people's prayers and restrained the
bloodthirsty enemy, for when this country's troops had fled as far as Raab,
if the enemy had pressed their advantage in swift pursuit, they would have
found the neighboring lands in a state of terror and flight and could have
destroyed them all and brought them under their power.
Even the authorities had to acknowledge that it was God who
prevented this. That same winter there would have been another
opportunity for the enemy. In all this we give all praise and honor to God
alone.
From 1593 on, the church community knew few quiet and peaceful
intervals, but had to endure hard and troubled times, particularly because
of the soldiers, who made straight for the communal households and
quartered themselves there for long periods, consuming large quantities of
their food and drink.
This went on for many years and grew worse the longer it lasted.
At the same time, some of the lords and magnates ruthlessly
exploited the communities living on their property, demanding
unendurable amounts of forced labor from them, withholding wages from
brothers in service on their farms, and finally driving them out emptyhanded, robbed of all their livestock, land, and buildings.
At a number of places the brothers had to sustain a loss of five, six, or
even eight thousand gulden, as at Frischau and Bochtitz in 1597, and at
Wostitz several years later. *
Moravia and neighboring countries were also visited by God with
scarcity and famine which hit the communities hard. But the Lord
graciously helped his people surmount these troubles until the Bocskay
War began in 1605.

***************

1605 Short description of distress brought by this terrible
war
Description of the Great Troubles more terrible than ever before
which the church of God along with other people had to suffer at the hands
of the Hungarian rebels.
It so happened that the imperial troops in Hungary, who were on their
way to fight the Turks (having already been at war with them for twelve
years), clashed with the Hungarians, and there was violence on both sides.
In the end, Hungarian troops reinforced by Turks and Tartars attacked
Moravia and Austria in great numbers, robbing, murdering, burning, and
carrying off prisoners, and leaving a trail of misery and destruction.
Just before all this began, the church had held the Meal of
Remembrance of the Lord Jesus Christ in all communities in the peace and
protection of the Almighty. Through the grace of God this celebration was
held in peace, without any interruption, and wholehearted praise and
thanks were given to the Lord for his protection. Soon afterward the
troubles began. Frightening reports followed one upon another that the
Hungarians, Turks, and Tartars were gaining ground. The towns of Tyrnau
and Skalitz surrendered, and so did many Hungarian lords, including some
with brothers living on their estates. The enemy drew closer and closer to
Moravia, and the burning, murdering, and pillaging began. The church had
to undergo great privation and terror and untold anguish of heart, such as
they had never heard of or suffered before.
It began when the enemy made a night raid on Sabatisch on May 3.
Through God's providence our people had fled into the woods, but two
brothers who were still in the house were horribly tortured. One in
particular was dreadfully burned and racked, and his tongue was torn from
the back of his throat; then both were hacked to death.

On May 4 the enemy raided the community at Velké Leváre,
mistreating and wounding many brothers and sisters. Forty-two were
carried away as captives, but all these were set free by the Lord of Tyrnau.
That same day there was a raid on Protzka.
On May 5, the enemy attacked in force, plundering and burning at St.
Georgen, St. Johannes, Gopschan, Neusorg, and Egbell, as well as a
number of farms and mills where our people were, and many neighboring
villages.
On May 7, the enemy started to invade Moravia. They burned
Landshut and Bilowitz to the ground, and struck down four brothers and
murdered them.
On May 9, the enemy plundered and burned Strassnitz, and three
brothers were killed.
On May 27 and 28, the enemy entered Austria, ruthless as ever,
robbing, murdering, and burning until twenty-four fires could be seen at
once. At Rabensburg three brothers were killed and cut in pieces.
On May 30, the community at Neudorf was plundered; four of our
people were killed, and three carried off as captives.
In this raid two brothers were murdered at Welka and one at Swetlau
and three people were carried off.
On June 2, there was an attack on Watzenowitz. The community was
burned to the ground and four brothers were murdered. The three
communities at Schadowitz, Goding, and Kreuz, were pillaged the same
day, as were the farms at Jermeritz, Tscheitsch, Grunwies, and the
surrounding area. Ten people were murdered and six people carried off
captive.
On June 28, the enemy plundered and burned Turnitz. Sixteen people
were struck down and killed without mercy, and 112 people - brothers,
sisters, and children - were carried off into foreign parts. The church of

God was in great anguish of heart, sorrowing as a true mother for her
children.
The same day the enemy burned Altenmarkt and the farm at
Birnbaum. Four people were murdered and twenty-five were carried off.
At Rampersdorf, one brother was murdered, and three people were taken
prisoner.
On July 12, the enemy burned down the communities at Pruschanek
and Tscheikowitz. Six brothers were murdered and thirty-five brothers and
sisters were seized and carried off into slavery among the Muslims.
On July 16, the enemy burned down Kobelitz, Boretitz, and Kostel,
and many neighboring villages. Four people were taken captive and one
brother was murdered.
The enemy then ceased their raids into Moravia. Instead they turned
against Austria and Styria, robbing, murdering, burning, and carrying off
captives, as they had done in Moravia.
The brutality and terror lasted three months. Sixteen communities,
large and small (including eleven schools), were destroyed. All were
robbed, torn down, and burned by the enemy, which caused great loss to
the church.
About 240 brothers, sisters, and children were taken as prisoners.
Through God's wonderful intervention, about ninety were later released
and returned to the church, some as late as 1613. But there are 150 of
whom we have heard no more. The number of people murdered in all that
terrible violence came to about eighty-one, many of them dedicated,
dependable brothers and sisters.
Short account of the overwhelming distress and anguish
***************

1605 Brief description of terrifying and heartrending times
Here then is a brief description of terrifying and heartrending times.
Dear brother Klaus Braidl was filled with such pain, care, and sorrow that
he wept, as did all the elders in the church. The faithful were in anguish
about the atrocities committed by ungodly heathen against God-fearing,
innocent people. It was appalling how they treated mothers with newborn
babies, expectant mothers, and unmarried sisters. Most terrible of all was
the way they ruthlessly carried off innocent little children, thrown on the
horses' backs with feet bound together and head hanging down. Many
mothers had to witness it. There was much weeping and heartache over all
the brothers and sisters and boys and girls who were carried off. Husbands
were separated from their wives, wives from their husbands, parents from
children, and one relative from another. Some had been born in the
community, while some had come from other countries for the sake of
faith and Christ's name. Now they were carried off to foreign lands and
sold into slavery to cruel, sodomitic people - the Turks and Tartars.
Every believer should always remember their misery as if he himself
were suffering with those who are tortured and imprisoned, hungry and
destitute, or driven with whips to heavy labor. It is impossible to describe
the great inner pain and distress they suffered, prevented from hearing
God's Word and deprived of the common life. We know of this from dear
brothers and sisters whom God in his mercy has freed from all that misery
and brought back to the church. Honor, praise, and glory be to him in all
eternity!
Now, dear brothers, whom God out of pure grace has called from
many places in the world to be his people in these last, evil days, let each
one of you cherish beyond comparison with anything on earth this
precious time of peace (once more granted through mercy) and this life
together in love. There is nothing else like it on earth. Here the zealous can
receive teaching, the hungry bread, the thirsty drink, the sick a doctor, and
the weak care and a place to rest. Here we can work in the light of day and
are not locked up in darkness.

Each one should make good use of his time and not waste even one
hour, for we do not know what the almighty God still has in store for us.
If some day any one of us should be deprived of his brothers and
sisters, he will be able to draw strength from this time to help him
overcome the mountain of sorrows and so attain the eternal crown of glory.
Amen.
One or two songs were made with fuller details of some of the events
in these disastrous years. *
***************

1606 Elder's decision to ransom captives
There is also an account from Salomon Boger or Berger about the
release of several captives. This brother made great efforts on behalf of
the prisoners. At risk to his life he went to Ofen and traveled four times
into Turkey searching for his wife and child. He even reached
Constantinople and Nicea. *
After this, persistent pleas were made to free the prisoners by paying
ransom. Their relatives in particular went repeatedly to the elders, and the
question was earnestly considered whether this was God's will. On
February 27, 1607, it was discussed in a large meeting at Pribitz. Soon
afterward, there was another long discussion whether this was in
accordance with our faith, and not against God. The wretched plight of the
captives was laid to heart. Because they were not taken captive for the
sake of their faith (which had happened to us here in Moravia in earlier
years), their situation was very different from anything in our previous
experience. Therefore it was agreed to help the prisoners by paying
ransom or by doing whatever else could be done. We could not desert
them, although the Turks or Hungarians set high prices. They might value
one sister at a hundred talers, another at two hundred, another at as much
as two hundred ducats, according to how young or good-looking they were.

***************

1606 Treaty made with Hungarian rebels
On September 14, 1606, a treaty was made with the Hungarian
rebels, who had caused the church untold distress and grief through
robbery, murder, burning, and deporting many God-fearing members. On
November 11, a peace was concluded with the Turks which lasted for
twenty years.
***************

1607 Comet
On November 24, 1607, a great comet with a long, pointed tail
appeared in the skies. It traveled faster than the other stars, moving on a
course from north to south, and could be observed for four weeks,
although growing fainter each night.
***************

1608 God's intervention of soldiers harassing the Church
community
In the spring of 1608, the church was in great danger. At that time the
provincial governor of Moravia was a papist nobleman named Ladislav
Berka of Duba. There were signs that the country would be overrun in a
surprise attack to bring the whole population to the papist faith. Several
troops of horsemen, recruited for this purpose under the leadership of two
counts, arrived unexpectedly at Moskowitz. For two hours they surrounded
our community and the entire village on their horses, expecting word from

the said Lord Berka to begin the assault. (Berka was away at Brünn and
with his followers planned to attack the members of the Provincial Diet.)
The soldiers could hardly wait, and thought this was the day for them to
sate the malice of their evil hearts at the expense of poor widows and
orphans. They made no secret of how they intended to deal with us and
how they would lord it in our houses.
The faithful were thrown into an agony of grief, for death and
destruction seemed to stare them in the face. In deep humility they called
upon the Lord in heaven to have mercy on his people (who trust in him and
have no other help), to comfort and rescue them in their great need. The
almighty God in heaven heard their sighing and pleading and came to his
children's help. He frustrated the purposes of these ungodly men, for they
received a message that was different from the one they had expected.
They heard that all their plots had been betrayed and were known to the
Provincial Diet at Brunn. Lord Berka, the provincial governor, had been
arrested, and their commander, Count Monfertili, with his four hundred
cavalry soldiers had turned tail and fled from Brünn.
This news thoroughly alarmed the horsemen at Moskowitz. All their
eagerness disappeared and they were so terrified that they no longer
wished to hurt anyone; their only anxiety was not to be in the rear. Leaving
food and drink untouched, they fled headlong as if pursued and rode
several miles that same day to the Bohemian border.
With swiftness beyond all human comprehension, the almighty God
rescued his people from the imminent danger and showed his might and
power against the enemies of Israel.
Once the peace was concluded with the Turks and Hungarians, there
were no open hostilities against Moravia until 1618. But the church of the
Lord was still harassed by the soldiers moving back and forth across the
country. These had to be supplied with enough food, drink, fodder, etc. to
satisfy them, or they took it by force.
***************

1611 Klaus Braidl's last words and passing
On January 21, 1611, the Friday before Paul's Conversion, our dear
and faithful brother Klaus Braidl fell asleep in the Lord at Neumühl
between seven and eight o'clock in the morning. Before his end he spoke
to several of the older servants of the Word who were with him during his
illness and said the following: My dear brothers, I feel that my end is
drawing near, and I may become so weak that I cannot talk with you
anymore. So I will speak now, while I am still able.
First of all, I would like you to know that my heart is at peace and
that I am in complete unity with all of you.
If there are any among you whom I have hurt, I beg you not to hold it
against me but to forgive me.
Dear brothers, I plead with you to keep watch against disunity, for
you can well imagine the terrible disasters that would come in its wake
and what great suffering would befall many widows and orphans.
Watch that you keep firmly to the fine old directives for church order
and follow them without moving the old boundary stones.
Hold firm to Christian community, and fight with all your might
against greed and selfishness, for covetousness is the root of all evil and
destroys everything good.
Guard against innovations or starting on a new course. Take special
care, my brothers, not to compete against or take advantage of one
another, for that is not right.
I appeal to you before God the Lord to give fatherly care to the
widows and orphans and to show loyal concern for the needs of the church.
Always act in the fear of God, following truth, justice, and righteousness.
My brothers, I am very weak and do not know if all the elders will get
here in time to see me, so I lay it on your heart, to tell them all that I greet
them warmly as a farewell.

I thank you and all the devout for all the kindness and faithfulness
you have shown me.
I am also thankful to the elders for the loyal support they have given
me, thus for the Lord's sake showing their obedience to me.
Tell the elders as a last request that I urge them before God to be
wholehearted in taking on the responsibility for the Lord's church and
giving all their strength to its care.
My heart is at peace, and I have a clear conscience before God. I say
farewell to the whole church community, to all the believers, young and
old, as I have told you before.
I commend you to the protection of the almighty God. May he care
faithfully for his people, bless you, keep you in peace, uphold and preserve
you. Amen. Amen.
After this, on the day recorded above and at the age of eighty-two, he
passed away in peace and under the Lord's blessing. He had been a brother
for more than sixty years, and the whole of the Lord's church had been
entrusted to him for nearly twenty-eight years.
A servant of the Word for forty-nine years, he had been used a great
deal for the Lord's work abroad. He was a diligent and devout man who
never put off until tomorrow the task he was able to do today.
On January 27, soon after our dear brother Klaus passed away, all the
elders in the service of the Word and the service for temporal needs, as
well as many trusted brothers from all places, met at Neumühl, and after
earnest prayers to the Lord and in great fear of God, they committed the
care and guidance of the whole church to dear brother Sebastian Dietrich.
***************

1613 Move back to Sabatisch

In 1613 on St. George's Day [April 23] we moved back to Sabatisch,
Hungary, at the urgent request of the lords at Branc and their promise of
favorable terms.
In contrast to other Hungarian lords, they had proved loyal to our
people during the terrible attack of 1605.
So the community at Sabatisch was started again after we had not
lived there for almost eight years.
***************

1618 Development of the terrible war
On November 29, 1618, around four o'clock in the morning, an
extraordinary comet appeared. It was brilliant and had a very long tail
such as is rarely seen. After that, it appeared each morning a little earlier
until it rose exactly at midnight. The time when it rose changed gradually
from morning to midnight and from midnight to evening. This covered a
period of four weeks, from November 29 until the end of December. It was
watched with great awe and fright and was last seen close to the North
Star, where it faded away.
At that time we did not know its meaning, but in the years following
we were to learn, with much suffering and sorrow, what it had signified.
This same year, 1618, fierce agitation and revolt broke out in the
kingdom of Bohemia, developing into terrible war and bloodshed between
the Emperor Matthias and the Lutheran assembly in Bohemia.
The initial incident was on May 23 when the Protestant assembly
under great provocation threw three Roman Catholic lords (imperial
officials and members of the council) out of the window of the Bohemian
chancellery in Prague Castle. On John the Baptist's Day [June 24], the
Provincial Diet at Olmutz therefore decided to recruit 5,000 men - cavalry
and foot soldiers - for the defense of Moravia.

The decision was carried out immediately. As a consequence, on top
of the heavy annual tax of one hundred gulden on each community, a tax of
fifty gulden was added. At the time we had about 40 communities in
Moravia and when 150 gulden were taken from every community large or
small, it amounted to 6,000 gulden. But it did not even stop at what the
Diet imposed: in many places livestock, grain, wine, and other goods were
taken in lieu of the tax at a much lower valuation than our selling price or
current prices in the country. In addition several communities had to
quarter soldiers for many weeks in summer and winter. On their marches
back and forth, the soldiers often overran our communities (they always
made for them whenever possible) and we had to give them food, drink,
and fodder - as much as they wanted. When they were billeted in other
places, we still had to supply them with provisions and fodder. Through
this heavy consumption, our food supply was greatly diminished.
***************

1619 Beginnings of the terrible war
In the year 1619, we still had the hope and the great longing that
peace would be concluded between the Holy Roman Emperor Matthias and
the Bohemian Protestants, not only saving the church community from
further harm, but also bringing relief from the heavy taxes. On March 20,
1619, however, the emperor Matthias died. Ferdinand, already crowned
king of Bohemia, continued the war that had started under Emperor
Matthias. Through his generals Count Buquoy and Count Dampierre (who
had also served under the previous emperor), King Ferdinand acted with a
brutality never known before in the kingdom of Bohemia. Therefore no
reconciliation was found - the war only grew all the more intense and
widespread - and the Bohemian Estates tried to gain the Moravian lords as
their supporters (while the king thought Moravia was on his side).
With this purpose, right at the beginning of the war, Count Heinrich
Matthias von Thurn, lieutenant general to the Crown of Bohemia, [but in
arms against King Ferdinand] marched into Moravia in early spring with a

large number of cavalry and infantry. He succeeded - although not without
opposition - in convincing the Moravian Estates to support Bohemia's
side. Most of this support came from the non-Catholic lords. The Catholic
lords, who held the power and the chief positions in Moravia, were
deposed from office, and the most important ones were imprisoned. Just as
in Bohemia at that time, directors or provincial governors were elected
from the three remaining estates (after the Fourth Estate, the prelates had
been ousted), and within three days they expelled the Jesuits from the
country forever.
All of this gave rise to King Ferdinand's fierce hatred toward
Moravia, which had originally accepted him as their prince and ruler after
the emperor's death.
Count von Thurn (mentioned above), who had marched from Moravia
to Vienna in Austria with his Bohemian troops and a good number of
Moravian forces, had to leave Vienna and return to Bohemia because
enemies were vandalizing his country. While Moravia was emptied of
troops, King Ferdinand sent in several thousand men under General
Dampierre to force the country to submit to his rule again.
Those who had deserted him and who still refused to return and beg
for his mercy were to be punished for their disobedience, and their lands
and property were to be given over to fire and the sword.
This terrible and remorseless punishment - beyond doubt by divine
decree for the chastening of God's people - fell most heavily on the church
communities of the Lord, although they were innocent of all that was
going on. They suffered incalculable damage and unspeakably great
sorrow, trouble, and anxiety from robbery, murder, and fire at the hands of
soldiers, especially from the Hungarians.
Some of these had been sent by Catholic lords in Hungary to help
King Ferdinand. Others had been hired by King Ferdinand himself from
the border forts. There had not been such suffering even in the earlier
Hungarian Rebellion of 1605 (apart from the suffering of those who were
carried off into Muslim slavery).

***************

A brief summary describing the damage & the great distress
A brief summary follows, describing first the damage done, and then
the great distress. *
On July 20, 1619, Dampierre and his troops arrived at Retz, moved on
to Joslowitz, seized the castle, and encamped there. From that time until
the end of November the plundering and burning of our communities
never stopped.
In these hard times, twelve of our communities were burned down
and completely destroyed, including six schools. This count does not
include the newly built house at Bilowitz and the communities in Kobelitz
and Damborschitz, which were also damaged when the enemy set fire to
them. Seventeen communities were plundered and desolated. But our
greatest heartache was that forty men and women were cruelly murdered
and that many God-fearing sisters, married and unmarried were raped. A
number of men and women were put to unspeakable tortures simply to
extort money from them.
Two hundred horses and many oxen, cows, hogs, and sheep were
stolen from the church, both at the communities and on the roads.
In the end, the misery and terror in this country exceeded anything in
human memory. There was no safety anywhere. The enemy attacked in the
north, then in the south, and finally all over the country. We had to flee
from our houses, and we were not safe on the roads or footpaths, not even
in the woods. We were in danger not only from the enemy but from the
peasants as well. In some places, when the enemy was gone, the peasants
were even worse. Everyone was out to rob. There was no sparing of the old
or sick, the mothers with newborn babies, or the young children. For many
weeks we went with them from place to place through the woods and
villages, suffering want, misery, and death. Reports of disaster followed
thick, one after another, and one depth of terror called to the next.

It is impossible to overstate the need and pain that was suffered.
Many God-fearing people wished they might die rather than see the great
misery of our poor little flock or hear of the shameful violation of our
women and girls. Many said they would be content with bread and water
for the rest of their lives and would never stop thanking God if only they
could remain peacefully under one roof. Truly it seemed as if God the
Lord had sent the Destroyer over Moravia. Although thousands had
already been slain, the enemy continued to rob, burn, and slaughter, and no
one had the power to resist.
But from the beginning of the world, the almighty God has always
helped his people in times of greatest need, when all human hope is gone.
He did so now, and none could doubt that in his holy heaven he heard the
unceasing, fervent pleading of his people. More than once he threw our
attackers into such panic that even though no one was after them, they fled
as if pursued by a great army -just as the Assyrians did, who were also a
dreaded scourge to God's people. So the Lord put a bit in the enemy's
mouth and a ring in his nose and led him back on the way by which he had
come. In spite of great tribulation, we were very much aware of the many
ways God opposed the enemy or changed their fury to kindness toward the
devout. Let us all the more thank the Lord as long as we live for his
deliverance and the good he has done to us. Let our lives be more
dedicated and holy so that he has no need to bring still harsher punishment
on us (as he can do sevenfold and then sevenfold again).
***************

1619 Sebastian Dietrich fell asleep/Ulrich Jaussling appointed
Elder
At Damborschitz between eight and nine o'clock in the morning on
Sunday, December 8, 1619, our dear, faithful brother Sebastian Dietrich,
Elder of the whole church, fell asleep in the Lord with peace in his heart
and a good conscience. He had been in the service of the Word for thirty-

two years, and the whole church had been entrusted to him for nine years.
He was sixty-six years old.
Since it was the will of God the Almighty to take our dear brother
Sebastian Dietrich from this world, in the peace of the church, there was a
meeting at Damborschitz on December 16 of all the elders in the service
of the Word and in the service of stewardship as well as all buyers and
storekeepers and many other trusted brothers from all communities. In the
fear of the Lord, these brothers laid their great need before God to appoint
another faithful shepherd for the church. They came to the joyful,
unanimous decision to entrust our dear brother Ulrich Jaussling with the
leadership of the church and the responsibility of caring for her in every
way with divine zeal.
***************

1620 The terrible war continued to spread
In the year 1620 the terrible war continued to spread. It had begun in
1618 and its progress in 1619 has been partly described already. During
1620, it grew worse and worse until nearly all kingdoms and countries
were in revolt. The emperor Ferdinand II, who had come to power on the
death of Emperor Matthias, grew more and more hostile because the
Bohemians, Moravians, Silesians, and Upper and Lower Lusatians, with
the help of the Hungarians, had turned against the house of Austria. They
had chosen and crowned Frederick, the elector palatine of the Rhine, as
king of Bohemia.
In order to crush this rebellion, Emperor Ferdinand II recruited bands
of cruel men from distant countries: Poles, Croatians, Frenchmen,
Walloons, Spaniards, and Italians. He enlisted them to fight against
Frederick and his allies, who were relying too heavily on their own
strength and good fortune. The duke of Bavaria and the elector of Saxony,
two powerful princes, also brought large forces to Emperor Ferdinand's
support. In 1620, because of this terrible war, the communities again

suffered incalculable loss of property. But much worse was the
unspeakable grief and misery - worse than anything the church had
endured before.
The misery of this time is described at length in the first Chronicle,
which gives the exact days when the troops raided different communities.
It would take too long for me to record all the details, and so I will
describe what happened at only one place, enabling the reader to know
what was done at all the others. In 1620, plundering and burning began as
early as February 7.
On July 28, a most tragic and horrible incident took place at Pribitz,
worse than anything that had happened so far in this war and worse than
anything ever heard of before.
At three o'clock that morning, when everyone was peacefully asleep
in bed, a force of 1,500 cavalry and musketeers (imperial troops, but for
the most part Poles) made a sudden and violent attack on Pribitz. They
were so unrestrained, ungodly, and savage that within two or three hours
they had murdered 52 brothers as well as a sister and her child. 54 people
had to be buried at the same time, among them many fine and muchrespected brothers, including brother Georg Bieberstein, a servant of the
Word; Felix Haushalter from Weisstatten; Valtin Kellner and his assistant
Kaspar Tischler; Hans Ausgeber; Martin Schultes from Neumühl; Hansel
Steiner, the schoolmaster; Heinrich Schuster (head cobbler); Uhl (head
tailor); Jahne (head tanner); Peter (head smith); Christoph Messerer; and
many others.
To get money, the Poles tortured some brothers terribly, particularly
Heinrich Schuster, who was burned with a red-hot iron. Wounds were cut
in his thighs, then gunpowder poured into them and ignited, and finally he
was so ruthlessly cut up that he scarcely resembled a human being.
Kaspar, the cellarer's assistant, had hot grease poured over his naked
body and was burned on his belly with red-hot pans. Abraham Messerer's
fingers were pinched off with tongs, and then he was cut in pieces. Peter
Schmidt was badly tortured and killed after he valiantly told the
marauders that even if he knew where a bushel of money was, he would

not show them. One brother's head was twisted until his face was over his
back, and other atrocities were committed.
The attackers seriously injured about sixty more people, shooting,
stabbing, beating, and slashing them so badly that many died afterward.
They shamelessly abused countless married and single sisters and even
ten- or twelve-year-old girls.
After wounding Hans Jakob Wolf severely because he was the main
minister, they carried him away as prisoner with seventy people, mostly
sisters. They also took great quantities of loot and all the horses, cows,
draft and fattened oxen, and many provisions. In short, the way they
treated the young and old, the crippled and sick, pregnant women, and
mothers with newborn babies was so gruesome, devilish, and inhuman that
such brutality had never happened in our land before. Even Turks and
Tartars, who do not claim to be Christians, would have said it was too
much. It was heartbreaking, more than human nature could stand, for a
wife to see her husband struck down and murdered before her eyes, for a
husband to see his own beloved wife raped, for mothers to have their
innocent children torn from their arms and flung aside, and for people to
see their relatives carried off. Every kind of shameful sodomy was
practiced. It is impossible to put it all into words - even a stone (to say
nothing of a human heart) would have been moved to compassion.
Oh, the weeping, the suffering, and the terrible heartache that God the
Lord allowed to come upon his people! And others in Moravia, highborn
and lowborn alike suffered the same.
God the Almighty, however, could not let such terrible violence
continue unpunished. After all the reckless evil they had done, the wicked
men started back for Laa (where they had come from), but were attacked
and put to flight by Moravian cavalry and Hungarian soldiers. Such
horrible shooting and slashing followed that the captives could scarcely
describe it all. What happened was so dreadful that our people believed
these soldiers were being repaid for having treated others the same way. It
was estimated that six hundred men were slain; one hundred and sixty
were taken prisoner, and twenty wagonloads of booty and all the livestock

(which they had stolen) were taken from them. About fifty of our people
were rescued from their brutality and sent back to the community.
The rest of the Polish musketeers escaped to the town of Laa, taking
with them twenty-one of the sisters they had captured and brother Hans
Jakob Wolf, who had been cruelly beaten and had severe head wounds.
With the help of citizens from Laa, our brother millers obtained the
release of these sisters, and brought them back to the church community.
Brother Hans Jakob Wolf still had to endure terrible suffering, for the
Polish captain tortured him with the headmill and on the rack just to extort
money from him. Then Hans Jakob became seriously ill and was moved to
Vienna where he lay sick in an iron trader's house. After a few days he fell
asleep in the Lord on September 19, 1620.
Before this terrible raid on Pribitz our places at Schadowitz,
Watzenowitz, Goding, Moskowitz, Kobelitz, Pruschanek, Lettonitz, and
Velké Leváre were pillaged and burned down by the imperial troops. Fiftyfour horses and all the sheep, hogs, and cattle were stolen. Six people were
murdered; a baby was shot while in its mother's arms, another struck and
killed in its father's arms, and many brothers and sisters were horribly
tortured.
Throughout the summer, the two great armies of Ferdinand II and
Frederick V were encamped opposite each other in Austria without any
decisive move. It was during this time that the above-mentioned raids into
Moravia took place. In the autumn the Duke of Bavaria took possession of
Upper Austria, and the Elector of Saxony with several thousand men
invaded the Duchy of Lusatia. Then the Duke of Bavaria with his forces
and the imperial general Count Buquoy marched on Bohemia. Although
their enemies followed close behind, the imperial troops took one town or
hamlet after another, until the two forces reached Prague and engaged in
battle at the White Mountain on November 8. Frederick's forces were
ignominiously defeated and his whole army put to flight. Frederick and his
wife and courtiers, with many prominent lords and officers, had to leave
Bohemia, since the city of Prague turned against him. As a result of this
battle, the emperor brought almost the whole kingdom of Bohemia into
subjection within a few days. Moravia also fell to him without resistance

and was soon back in his power. So in the cold of winter, a new danger, an
appalling distress, loomed over the church community, and deep called to
deep.
Through many agonizing experiences we had learned how the brutal
foreign troops would treat our people, who because of their faith were
hated more than others. It seemed quite impossible, however, to attempt
flight in the middle of winter; we were such a needy little group, with
many very young children and sick and old people. The weaker ones would
certainly perish miserably from hunger and cold. So we decided to entrust
ourselves to God and remain in our homes to await what he permitted. We
turned to God constantly, early and late, praying earnestly for the
protection of our poor widows and orphans during the bitter winter.
The imperial vanguard advanced at great speed with its marauders,
the very worst of all. Spaniards, Neapolitans, French, Poles, Walloons,
Croats, and Count Fugger's German musketeers, even more godless than
the rest, at once started their usual cruel acts on the people in the upper
communities.
On December 14 and 17, Teikowitz was raided, also Stignitz and
Wischenau, and Tschermakowitz. The soldiers plundered the communities
for several days and carried off whatever they pleased. When one band
left, another arrived, subjecting us to their shameless violence and
sodomy. In order to get our money, they relentlessly tortured some
brothers and killed three of them. Many respectable women, young girls,
and even little eight or nine-year-old girls and boys were brutally ravished.
Dear God! - they acted completely against human nature.
Such dreadful things happened that all the elders and the whole
church were seized with fear. They evacuated some of the communities
before the vicious soldiers reached them, for no one wanted to risk such
danger anymore.
Those able to escape from the upper communities fled down to
Alexowitz and Kromau and the lower communities.

The people from Pribitz, Pohrlitz, Nuslau, Klein Niemtschitz, and
Moskowitz fled to Pausram, Austerlitz, Damborschitz, Kobelitz, and
Nikolsburg.
Within a few days it was necessary to abandon Schakwitz, Neumühl,
Damborschitz, Kobelitz, Schadowitz, Kostel, and Altenmarkt and flee
toward Goding and Wessely. The people from Neumuhl and Kostel took
refuge at Eisgrub, where the lords allowed them to shelter in the castle.
General Buquoy and the imperial army now advanced to Eibenschitz,
Gross Seelowitz, and Auspitz, with the terrible vanguard always ahead,
plundering, burning, and killing wherever they went. Our people from
these communities, including great numbers from Goding, Wessely,
Neudorf, Strassnitz, Ungarisch Ostra, and other nearby places, were forced
to cross into Hungary and make their way down to Sabatisch. Brother
Ulrich Jaussling, Elder of the church, brother Hauptrecht Zapff, Seyfried
Geiss, Rudolf Hirzel, Franz Walter, and other servants of the Word
traveled with them into a strange country with a very poor and needy
flock.
By now over three thousand of our people were at Sabatisch. It was
impossible to support such a large number in the little community. The
imperial forces were a danger, too. A way out had to be found. In these
straits, our people were forced to cross over the Little Carpathians (no
matter how sad and painful it might be) to find shelter at Weidowitz and
Gostelein, Schächtitz and Echtlnitz, on the estates of the Counts Nadasdy
and Erdboy. God in his wonderful providence had prepared a place where
they were received with respect and great sympathy for their plight and
could buy food and drink at a reasonable price. But it was not what they
were used to in the community; there was great lack of clothing and bed
linen. As a result of repeated exposure to hunger, cold, and the terrors such
evil times bring with them and perhaps still more as an affliction from
God, the Hungarian sickness broke out among the fugitives. So many were
lying ill that they were unable to take proper care of one another.
Consequently, five hundred people died within a short time at the
aforementioned places on the other side of the Hungarian mountains.
***************

1621 More communities plundered
The distress and misery already described continued into the year
1621. It was an evil year, full of anguish.
In January, after much plundering, the communities at Pribitz and
Nuslau were burned to ashes.
The community at Kobelitz was plundered until nothing was left. All
the livestock was taken as well.
Watzenowitz was burned to the ground: Pruschanek was plundered
and Hans Walmann, the steward, was killed by the Poles. Wessely and
Neudorf were also burned to the ground and several people died an
agonizing death in the fire. Schadowitz and Nikoltschitz were plundered.
In February, Herspitz and Damborschitz were plundered. Three
people were murdered.
Protzka, St. Johannes, and Velké Leváre were plundered by the Poles.
Saxon cavalry pillaged the community at Polehraditz and among other
things stole twenty barrels of the best wine. Afterward they burned the
place. Kostel and Altenmarkt were plundered and a brother was shot to
death by the Hungarians.
Alexowitz and Klein Niemtschitz were plundered. At Bilowitz, three
brothers were murdered by Poles.
On April 17, the Poles made a sudden attack on Sabatisch, plundered
the houses, and brutally murdered five brothers and one sister. Six brothers
were mortally wounded and died within a few days.
As has been said, some of the people were forced to find refuge on
the other side of the Hungarian mountains. They had been there about ten
weeks when on April 2, 1621, several Transylvanian envoys came to them
at Schächtitz and several more to Weidowitz with a written order.

The envoys brought a large number of horse and foot soldiers and
many wagons with them. They showed the letter and explained the wish
and intention of his, highness Bethlen Gabor, Prince of Transylvania, etc.
He wanted the brothers and sisters to agree to travel to Transylvania and to
make ready for the journey. Once there, they would enjoy his paternal
protection in every respect.
Look at this letter, said the envoys. Read the eight conditions
generously offered by our gracious prince and lord, the present possessor
of the Hungarian crown. You will not be serfs but will have extensive
privileges to guarantee your freedom. You will be and remain highly
valued people. You will be granted such privileges by the prince and his
country that you may have freedom at all times to practice your religion
and your trades as profits and pleases you best.
In spite of seeing the German letter with its eight points and in spite
of hearing their friendly words, the brothers and sisters still shrank from
going with them. When the envoys noticed their reluctance, they
immediately took 84 adults and children by force to Neuhof and carried
off 101 people to add to their group a week later. Brother Franz Walter was
among their number.
On all stages of their journey they were treated with the utmost care
and consideration by the prince's envoys, who paid great respect to their
ruler's instructions. All this was God's providence. In May they arrived in
Transylvania and stayed overnight at Dornburg.
The following morning two hundred riders whom they had never seen
before appeared near the market. The escort held a consultation with them
but the brothers had no idea what was planned.
The next morning they were divided into groups. Dear brother Franz
Walter, servant of God's Word, was sent with forty-seven people to
Radnoten. (The whole journey was a sad one for both him and his little
flock, and he did everything he could to lead and encourage them in a
fatherly way.) Hans Jakob Hegeler, cellarer from Damborschitz, was taken
with 88 others to Weissenburg. The remaining forty-eight people were
taken to the Szekler district.

They parted in tears and with aching hearts, for they had no idea what
their escort had in mind and whether the envoys were acting on their
master's order or not. The separation lasted fourteen weeks, until August
31.
Then, through the Lord's intervention, they were brought together
once more. The prince's wife, Susanna Carolina, visited the group at
Alwinz' near Weissenburg. After enquiring very precisely how many of
their people had entered the country, she had them all moved to the same
place. This was a source of tremendous joy to the brothers and sisters.
They did not know how to thank God enough.
But as no other housing was available when they were all gathered,
they had to make do with the prince's stables.
On March 17 in this year 1622, the owner of the place, Princess
Susanna Carolina, came from Weissenburg to Alwinz and met with several
of the elders. She showed them a meadow by the Maros where they might
build their houses. The brothers received it gratefully and began that very
year to construct housing suited to life in Christian community, such as
they had had in Moravia.
On September 28 of that same year 1622, Emperor Ferdinand's
mandate reached the church community of the Lord in Moravia. Issued at
the instigation of Cardinal Franz von Dietrichstein, the mandate read: All
those known as brothers and sisters must vacate Moravia within four
weeks. More will be reported of this later.
So in order to remain under the mercy and grace of God, the faithful
had to leave their twenty-four households, taking nothing with them.
The cold of winter was approaching, but as the persecuted community
of God in Hungary had almost no temporal means, it was impossible to
provide housing for all the refugee communities. So brother Michel
Kocher (who passed away at Grosswardein) was sent to Transylvania with
the two households from Moskowitz and Alexowitz. Six hundred ninetyfive people arrived in Alwinz during Christmas week.

The brothers at Alwinz did not even have enough housing for
themselves. Those who came to them had to go through the winter with
makeshift accommodation - a bed or living space in houses in the
neighborhood. Then three different sicknesses broke out among the people
inside and outside the community, and in this way in one year the Lord
took four hundred men, women, and children out of their misery into his
rest.
The preceding paragraphs give a short account of the beginning of the
community at Alwinz. It is beyond question that God ordained these
happenings, wanting to stir us so that a tiny spark might survive from the
church in Moravia on which he had bestowed his glorious gifts and light.
***************

1621 Short accounts of the terrible events of the war
Now I will take up the story of God's church in Moravia during the
evil days of war.
It has already been said that the year 1621 began with many disasters.
The soldiers continued their plundering and burning throughout that year
into 1622. In short, it was an evil and fearful time.
It is impossible to record all the inhuman savagery vented on us and
other people during this ungodly, cursed war waged by Spaniards,
Walloons, Poles, and the German imperial troops, and how many
honorable and faithful sisters (who had loved modesty and chastity from
their youth up), expectant mothers, mothers of newborn babies,
desperately ill sisters, unmarried sisters and little girls eight and nine
years old, even young boys (which is completely contrary to nature) were
shamelessly raped in public. Men and boys were hung up by their private
parts and burned with red-hot irons and pans. Their feet were put in the
fire until the toes burned away; wounds were cut and powder shaken in and
set alight; fingers and ears were cut off. They were tortured until their eyes
popped out of their heads and they were hanged by the neck like thieves.

These and other unheard-of things that cannot be told for very shame
were publicly committed by the imperial soldiers (who believed
themselves the best of Christians). Anyone who has not himself known the
anguish of hearing and seeing it all would not believe that a man who
claims to be a Christian can commit acts so vile and devilish. It would
have been no wonder if heaven itself had paled, if the earth had shaken,
and if the elements had trembled. Even the devil might have shown greater
fear of God's power and majesty than these devil-possessed men. May
God, into whose hands we entrust all judgment, open their eyes.
***************

1621 Ulrich Jaussling passed away/Elder Rudolf Hirzel's
treachery
At six o'clock in the evening on Maundy Thursday, April 8, 1621, our
dear and loyal brother Ulrich Jaussling fell asleep in the Lord with a
peaceful heart and a clear conscience at Branc Castle in Hungary. He was a
devout and zealous man, a faithful Elder of the whole church. He departed
after enduring many hardships and anxieties that attacked him and the
Lord's church in this time. As he neared his end, he often asked that in
these sorrowful and evil days the Lord might take the church into his
faithful care. Brother Ulrich was forty-eight years old and had been a
servant of the Word for twenty-two years. For over a year he had led the
church of the Lord in the midst of turmoil and disaster.
At that time the Lord's church was without an Elder for four weeks,
since the danger from soldiers was too great for the elders to gather. But
on May 9, the entire brotherhood gave unanimous testimony for brother
Rudolf Hirzel to lead and faithfully care for the church of God, and he was
earnestly entrusted with this task by dear brother Hauptrecht Zapff. The
enormous damage and slander brought on the church shortly afterward by
this Rudolf will soon be told in all its pain and distress.

On June 2, 1621, Cardinal von Dietrichstein ordered Rudolf and two
other brothers to be abducted from Neumuhl on the Prince von
Liechtenstein's estate. (One of the brothers was Rudolf's cousin, Christoph
Hirzel, a servant for temporal needs.) In the name of his imperial majesty
they were taken by trickery and force of arms and carried off with jeering
and contempt to Nikolsburg Castle. After they had been prisoners there for
several weeks, the cardinal, Lord Seifried Christoph Breuner and another
count demanded that Rudolf, as Elder, should inform them where the
church community's money was kept. They threatened him with dire
consequences if he did not consent: Terrible things would be done to him
and the other elders, and our church would be exterminated. A start would
be made with Neumuhl and Nikolsburg at dawn the next day. On the other
hand, if he told them about the money, the emperor would protect us as his
loyal subjects and grant us privileges.
Together with these horrifying threats were many highflown
assurances, as from honorable men, that his imperial majesty had no
intention of depriving them of their money; he only wished to be informed
where, in what form, and how much it was and to have it in safekeeping so
that the rebels, his majesty's enemies, would not get hold of it to support
their war efforts against him. With such threats and cajolery they induced
Rudolf to show them where the money was - money entrusted to him and
gained by the toil and sweat of many faithful brothers and sisters. He
thought that in this way he would save the lives of the people. The cardinal
immediately took it. The church community lost almost all of their ready
money and never got a penny back.
In addition to the heavy monetary loss, Rudolf's treachery brought
deep disgrace and much slander from every class of person, high and low
alike, and even from other groups of brethren; it also led to discontent,
protest, and disturbance within the church.
Therefore the whole brotherhood decided Rudolf should be relieved
of his office, and he was excluded from the church. This took place at
Pausram. He humbly admitted his guilt, and he sought repentance with
tears but was unable to attain it fully, for on April 27 of the following year

at Goding (where he had been taken back into the household) he died from
jaundice.
***************

1622 Valentin Winter entrusted with the care of the Church
To return to February 21, 1622: Once this miserable business had
been concluded, the meeting at Pausram turned to the very important
matter of electing a new shepherd, since there had been no shepherd in the
church for nine months in this dangerous and evil time.
All the assembled brothers gave joyful and unanimous testimony in
favor of laying on our dear brother Valentin Winter the task of directing
and caring for the church with godly zeal. He accepted the task in due
obedience, though sadly confessing his inadequacy and lack of wisdom.
The prayer of the people was that the Lord in his grace strengthen this
brother, and that he give his people wisdom and the ability to reassure and
rebuild the church so that what was broken might be raised and what was
lost might be restored.
It brought much comfort and joy to the church to have an Elder once
more, for brother Valentin obediently took up the burden of this highly
important task. With all his strength he strove to oppose the greed,
arrogance, and disorder that- had crept into the church during this odious
war and to restore the cornerstones of God's church, for which many
faithful members had shed their blood. The other elders loyally supported
him.
This year despite the fact that soldiers were swarming through the
country, making travel unsafe, God in heaven granted such grace and
blessing that we could celebrate the Lord's Supper in remembrance of our
dear Savior Jesus Christ. This was not possible in the previous year, 1621.
On June 12, 20, and 26, at ten of our communities we celebrated the Lord's
Supper under God's great and merciful protection, in peace, and with joy

and thanksgiving, and everyone was able to return safely home. The Lord
alone be praised!
***************

1621 Peter Kaufman & followers excluded; false prophecy
But the Lord's church was to be tempted in every way by Satan and
his children. The ugly affair with Rudolf caused several members of the
community to become puffed up with pride and to turn against the elders
with abuse and contempt, just as Korah and his followers did. They
declared that saving money was nothing but mammon and avarice and
showed a lack of trust in God, that the elders and the whole brotherhood
had broken their covenant and forsaken the right way, and that the church
was no longer the same as in Jakob Hutter's time. They wanted to return to
the first vision, restore the old boundary stones, and rebuild the Hutterian
Church from its ruins.
Those who took the lead were three tailors and two weavers, chief
among them Peter Kaufman, a tailor and a native of Lothringen. An
obstinate and difficult person, he had been excluded several times for his
irresponsible, self-indulgent, and sinful life.
Peter Kaufman claimed to understand secrets of the Scriptures and
prophesied from strange books, especially against the papacy, foretelling
its fall in the year 1630, when there would be a Lutheran emperor. He also
warned that our church was in danger of collapsing and dissolving.
Possessed by a spirit of pride, he and his supporters had the audacity to say
that the only God we believed in was the Holy Roman Emperor, something
that not even cursed, unconverted Jews say of us. Out of the malice of
their hearts, they attacked the church and the elders with many other lies
and senseless accusations which they could not possibly justify.
Finally they were excluded from the church because they refused to
be corrected by godly instruction. They wanted to establish a church of
their own, but because they had so many false and confused ideas, they

could not even agree with one another, especially about community. They
finally decided to put off this question for the time being, as the devil
might be deceiving them about it. In their folly they expected their cause
to prosper, but it was not founded in God and therefore came to nothing.
Death by the plague overtook the said tailor, Peter Kaufman (an impudent,
malicious blasphemer), and shortly afterward his main supporter as well.
The rest disappeared one after the other. Some scattered in this direction,
others in that, and although they had been so great in their own eyes, in a
very short time nothing more was heard of them. That was how the Lord
brought their pride to a fall, for he has no pleasure in the proud.
***************

1622 Hardships caused by war
In spite of all the oppression and grinding misery, now lasting four
years, we never lost hope of a little relief. But the longer the war
continued, the worse grew the hardships. We had thought ourselves at our
very poorest, since (as mentioned above) our money was almost gone,
many communities were burned down, others sacked, and our food
supplies eaten up by soldiers. Yet an impossibly heavy tax was imposed on
us in July 1622 (much more than others in the country had to pay). For
five months our communities (half of them not lived in anymore by this
time) were to make a monthly contribution of 1,500 talers cash, as well as
540 bushels of rye and 540 of oats. In five months this would total 7,500
talers cash and 5,400 bushels of rye and oats.
It was not within the church's means to hand over such a large amount
of money and grain, for if the taxes were levied for a year (and such taxes
usually lasted a long time), the quantity of grain required was more than
all of us brothers in Moravia could grow. Our income was far too small to
supply the 18,000 talers cash per year. Besides, it was against our faith and
conscience to contribute money for the war, and our forefathers had never
done so. A letter, therefore, was sent to Cardinal von Dietrichstein telling
him how much the church had suffered in this war, how many

communities we had lost, and how many others had been pillaged and
their stores consumed by soldiers; that our cash had already gone to the
emperor and that all the communities put together did not earn enough to
pay a weekly contribution instead of giving provisions for the soldiers.
Such a heavy imposition would mean starvation and ruin for our people,
since even before this, the income of most of our communities had not
been enough for their daily bread. We wrote that many communities were
so poor that for over a year they had not been able to give even one
measure of wine to mothers of newborn babies or to the dying. In some
places, no matter how hard our people worked, they had to go without
meat for two months. Many were without clothes or bedding. Even though
in one year we spent a large sum of money (which we prefer not to name)
on hides, wool, linen, salt, lard, and various grains, it was all looted by the
soldiers. There was scarcely one community with enough food for the next
three weeks. Some communities were able to reap only enough to provide
seed to sow when God granted us peace.
We had gone through times of such need and distress that it would
have been better to die than to live. Our wives' and children's best clothing
had been taken off their backs for money to buy bread. Therefore, we poor
and oppressed people begged the lord cardinal most humbly to have
compassion on us.
Yet no matter what might happen, for reasons of conscience we could
not and would not do what was asked of us (as far as money was
concerned) any more than our forefathers had done. We were prepared,
instead, to suffer and wait patiently for whatever God would allow to
happen. With regard to the grain (since men must be fed and it is not a
direct levy for the war), we would wish to do the same as our countrymen,
as far as we were able.
In response to our letter, complaints, and humble petitions (which we
had made to other Moravian lords as well), the lord cardinal informed us
that the mandate was already made public and he could not alter it without
the emperor's consent. We could see that nothing lay ahead but great
calamity.
***************

1622 Believers no longer tolerated in Moravia
All the estates as well as the towns of Moravia protested the taxation
and appealed to the emperor, even though none of them were taxed half as
heavily in proportion to their income as we were. The matter was therefore
postponed. In the meantime the cardinal (a bitter enemy of the devout)
went to Vienna. He made an oath that on his return to Moravia he would no
longer tolerate us in the country. Once in Vienna, he and his sworn
supporters and the council of priests falsely represented to Emperor
Ferdinand and his chief councilors that we were rebels, enemies of His
Majesty, and had caused him nothing but trouble during the war. Through
this false accusation the cardinal gained the power his malicious heart
desired; he received authority from the emperor to drive our whole church
out of Moravia. He wasted no time in carrying out his commission.
Two days after his return from Vienna he made a start on his own
properties at Nikolsburg, Tracht, and Klein Niemtschitz near Prahlitz.
Without warning, he sent his officials and soldiers to these three
communities on one day and had all the rooms, cellars, grain lofts, flour
lofts, attics, and bedrooms sealed off, so no one could enter his own room.
Soldiers were set to watch the houses.
Then the people were called together and an imperial document was
read to them: Neither they nor their fellows in faith were to be tolerated
any longer, in Moravia or in any other country under the emperor's power.
Even in Transylvania they would not be safe but would be a people marked
for death, for the emperor had a long arm.
Those, however, who would renounce their error and let themselves
be taught by the priests and Jesuits were to remain in their homes, have the
use of their property, and, like all other subjects in the country, receive the
protection and favor of the emperor.
Following this, each of them had to declare individually whether he
would comply. Already at that point 230 people, young and old, from those

three communities on the cardinal's land shrank back from Christ's bitter
way of suffering. These were for the most part loose and disorderly
members who had already been a burden to the church, since they loved
the pleasures of the world more than God and listened to the voice of the
old serpent. Their names were at once written down and they were
separated from the others.
But most declared that theirs was the right faith, the truth, and the
way to eternal life; come life, come death, they would not give way. The
cardinal tried in person to get several brothers, especially Jakob
Braitenstainer, the steward from Tracht, to renounce their faith. Jakob,
however, told him to his face in front of many others that he would never
trust in salvation through the papist faith, which let people burn our
houses, slaughter our men, dishonor our wives and daughters and still be
considered good Christians even if they behaved worse than the Turks. Yet
God-fearing people who did honest work to support themselves and
injured no one were forced to leave the country. After this and more, the
cardinal was silenced and did not know what to answer. Nevertheless, all
who would not follow the advice of the false prophets or worship the
image of the beast were driven out and robbed of their homes, land, and
goods, according to God's Word spoken long ago by the prophet, that those
who fear God will be driven from their homes, robbed, and destroyed.
Thus will his chosen be made known.
At Nikolsburg, Tracht, and Niemtschitz our people were allowed to
take away only as much as they could carry, and no tools at all. All
livestock and whatever was in the houses, fields, or vineyards had to be
left behind. At Wisternitz, in particular, brothers and sisters in service
with the cardinal were stripped and even the soles of their shoes were
searched. The plane was taken from the carpenter and the shears from the
tailor; they were forced to leave empty-handed. The faithful service we
had given the cardinal and his forebears, all the hard work over many
years, was repaid with crass ingratitude.
The elders wrote humbly to the cardinal, asking him even if he no
longer wanted our people on his estates, to let them at least take their
livestock and the goods they had earned with the sweat of their brow. He

should not sin by robbing God-fearing people, for God would not let it go
unavenged. The cardinal had been heard to say that he alone was
responsible for our persecution and was the only one from whom we could
get help, so we begged him repeatedly, both verbally and in writing, to
show us some sympathy as a man in authority. We begged him to provide
shelter in Moravia during the winter (already practically upon us) at least
for the old and sick, whom we wanted to gather in two or three places. He
should remember that we had lived in Moravia over eighty years and had
faithfully served many lords.
But our petitions fell on deaf ears, for his heart was hardened against
us. On another occasion our brothers tried again, fell on deaf ears, in all
humility, to approach him with an urgent petition. Besides the written
petition, some brothers went to plead directly with him for mercy and
understanding for our suffering people. With a smile on his lips and
mocking words he told them, You brought me only a handwritten petition
from your elders, but I will give you a printed answer. Then the cardinal
sent his servant to them with a printed mandate issued at the emperor's
command and in his name, dated from his residence at Brunn, September
28, 1622.
It read as follows:
***************

1622 Mandate sent to the brothers by the Cardinal
Whereas His Majesty the Holy Roman Emperor, having won his
world-renowned victory, intends to restore order in his hereditary
kingdoms and above all to promote the honor and service of God; whereas,
however, the Anabaptists, or Hutterian Brethren, though tolerated nowhere
in the whole Holy Roman Empire, travel abroad and mislead people to
accept their errors, deny baptism to infants, and refuse to submit to
governmental authority as God has commanded, besides teaching and
practicing many other accursed errors; whereas, moreover, in the recent

uprising they aided and abetted the enemies of His Imperial Majesty and
of the archduke of Austria through communications and help based on
their knowledge of the countryside:
Therefore it is His Majesty's firm intention and strict order that every
person, male or female, who confesses to the Hutterian faith must leave
Moravia within four weeks of this date and must never be found there
again on pain of death. Those, however, who allow themselves to be turned
from their error and led to the true way, shall be given every assistance.
***************

1622 Persecution intestified
Winter was nearing, and we did not know where we could possibly
house our needy flock of so many thousands of souls. After this harsh
imperial mandate, we humbly approached the cardinal again. We also
turned to Prince Karl von Liechtenstein; Lord Breuner, the lord marshal
and governor of Austria; and other distinguished lords. Finally, in our
extreme need, we approached the emperor himself.
We sincerely apologized for not obeying him - for we had never acted
in any way against His Majesty - but we begged him to hear our desperate,
humble plea that we might stay just for the winter.
In spring we would comply with the imperial mandate to leave the
country and go into suffering and misery. But we were denied all mercy by
the emperor and given the answer that His Majesty would leave the matter
to the discretion of Cardinal von Dietrichstein.
Thereupon the persecution for our faith and witness to Christ
intensified. The cardinal took over the Moravian estates of several lords
who were in prison and then drove us empty-handed from Austerlitz,
Damborschitz, Alexowitz, Moskowitz, Kostel, and Altenmarkt, just as he
had done from his own property.

All the horses, oxen, cows, sheep, and hogs, all the grain and other
provisions - a large amount of valuable goods - had to be left behind. But
people managed to get away secretly with some clothing and bed linen; in
several places they even had help from the soldiers.
A few lords, knowing we were innocent, wanted to show us sympathy
and allowed us to take some of our goods. But often the transport cost
almost as much as the things were worth, for we had to hire wagons and an
escort of soldiers. Without them it was unsafe to travel, and there was
hardly a community in Moravia that had been allowed to keep its horses
and draft oxen. A wagoner's pay for two or three miles was fifteen or
sixteen gulden, and each member of the escort required up to ten gulden.
Everyone wanted to grow rich at our expense, no matter how poor it made
us.
So, by the order of Emperor Ferdinand II, instigated by Cardinal von
Dietrichstein, we were persecuted and driven out of 24 communities in
Moravia in October of this year, 1622, for the most part empty-handed.
Because of our faith we were expelled from Neumuhl, Nikolsburg,
Austerlitz, Tscheikowitz, Klein Niemtschitz, Damborschitz, Kobelitz,
Alexowitz, Herspitz, Tracht, Stignitz, Urschitz, Pausram, Wischenau,
Kostel, Pribitz, Teikowitz, Altenmarkt, Pohrlitz, Tschermakowitz, Goding,
Nuslau, Moskowitz, and Schadowitz.
A large amount of the church's movable and immovable property and
a great deal of wine and grain produced in this year were left behind in the
twenty-four communities in Moravia. Most communities had already
sown their winter rye. The damage the church suffered for the sake of truth
in this persecution is beyond all description, but part of the tremendous
loss is recorded here for posterity:
Over 36,000 bushels of wheat, over 5,000 bushels of barley, over
21,500 bushels of oats, about 6,000 bushels of buckwheat, over 300 barrels
of wine; 130 head of cattle, 70 oxen, 150 horses, 655 hogs; in addition, all
kinds of household goods - copper pans, cloth, wool, linen, salt, lard,
tallow, hemp, hides, leather, and similar things - as well as tools and stores
of material for the craftsmen. At the lowest estimate (by values then
current in Hungary and Moravia) the total value exceeded 364,000 talers.

This did not include the twenty-four communities' buildings and the
vineyards, gardens, fields, and meadows, which would raise it to an
immense sum.
We had to leave Moravia and go into Hungary practically emptyhanded. Winter was almost upon us, and it was a difficult time, when
everything was very expensive. Many of our people suffered in this time
of great poverty. A large number had gathered, and there was very little
food. Yet the elders, and especially Valentin Winter, Elder of the whole
church, did not spare any effort but did their utmost day and night to
obtain bread and shelter. God moved the hearts of many Hungarian lords,
with the result that they were glad to take our people in. They were even
upset if we did not settle on their estates.
Yet the great famine in Hungary, worse than any ever recorded in
history books or chronicles, hit the church of God especially hard. For a
bushel and a half of wheat cost ten talers; rye, eight; barley, seven; peas,
ten; millet, nine; and buckwheat, five talers. A loaf of bread cost one taler;
a barrel of salt, two talers; a pound of meat, nine groschen; a jug of beer,
eighteen kreuzers; and one pint of wine, forty-two kreuzers. A half
measure of lard was priced at one taler, a hundredweight of tallow at fifty
talers, a hundredweight of wool at one hundred and thirty talers, a
hundredweight of hemp at nine gulden, and two untanned oxhides at
sixteen with the taler at seventy-five kreuzer. In short, all basic
commodities were extremely expensive. Ducats and imperial talers were
also at a higher rate. A ducat was worth six Hungarian talers and an
imperial taler was worth four talers of the depreciated currency - which
meant loss and hardship not only to the church community but to all this
land of Hungary and other countries, too.
No one would sell anything unless paid in the old currency of
imperial talers and ducats, but we earned few of these, and no one in our
whole church had any income. So for the church's needs we had to fall
back on the little which our forefathers had put by in good years against
such times and which the elders had painstakingly saved from being taken
by the cardinal. This had to be used to cover the people's most urgent
needs.

Yet in these days of famine the people of God's church were better
provided with bread than many peasants around us and so (thanks be to
God) no one had to starve. Through God's grace, in the midst of the misery
and distress we were far better off than our enemies would have expected.
The Lord in heaven, who never abandons his children, mercifully helped
us through, even in the greatest fear and need.
The Lord had sent this distress to his people as a test and purification
to reveal the proven ones. Many could not stand the test, particularly the
shallow and insincere, even though they had left Moravia. They were just
like the children of Israel, who left Egypt, (where they had had bread in
plenty) but regretted it as soon as they were faced with suffering, disaster,
hunger, and cold. They turned back, abandoning the Lord and his church.
Many did not even leave the country; they left the church while still in
Moravia (most of these being people from the cardinal's estates, as
mentioned above) and the number of faithful members was greatly
decreased. Then the Lord punished us further with the plague and took
many of our people from us through death. *

Lundenburg-Bilowitz
Lundenburg
Altenmarkt
Bilowitz
Rampersdorf
Kostel upper & lower
Seelowitz
Eibes
Nikoltschitz

Pribitz
Pohrlitz
Nuslau
Pausram
Austerlitz
Herspitz
Nikolsburg
Tracht
Steinitz
Damborschitz
Kanitz
Klein Niemtschitz upper & lower
Landshut
Lettonitz
Skalitz
Gallitz northeast of Znaim
Wischenau
Stiegnitz
Tscheikowitz
Tscheikowitz

Pruschaneck
Bochtitz
Frischau
Goding
Kobelitz
Mahrisch
Kromau
Moskowitz
Alexowitz
Milotitz
Watzenowitz
Urchitz
Wessely
Schadowitz
Ungarisch-Ostra
Neudorf
Eisgrub
Neumühl
Ober-Dannowitz
Dannowitz

Tulleschitz
Tschermakowitz
Wostitz
Weisstatten
Polehraditz
***************

1622 Move to Transylvania
Most of the people from the two communities at Moskowitz and
Alexowitz set out with the three servants of the Word, Michael Kocher,
Thoman Wilhelm, and Albrecht Grob (who was still in a time of testing),
and traveled by difficult routes and in harsh weather to join our people in
Transylvania. A little group with a servant of the Word was also sent to
Croatia in response to Lord Batthyany's request and favorable offers.
These were mostly in a position to serve him at good annual wages as
cellarers, storekeepers, work managers, farm overseers, gardeners, millers,
carpenters, and barber-surgeons.
So this considerably reduced the numbers in the communities settled
on the manorial estates of Branc, Velké Leváre, Schossberg, Schächtitz,
Trentschin, and Schmalenz, as well as at Kesselsdorf' (under Lord Hans
Palffy) and at Farkeschin (under the count palatine). *
At Velké Leváre we moved back into the houses we had built, but not
with the same privileges. At Egbell we rented the small castle from Lord
Emmerich Czobor for three years at four hundred gulden annually. At
Senitz, Rabenska, and Tschatschowe (Castkov) on the Branc estate, we
found winter lodging for a certain rent. At Schächtitz, too, Count Nadasdy
let us use a few rooms in the castle over the winter. At Soblahof on the

Trentschin estate we bought a house with the land belonging to it for 150
imperial talers. (Each taler equaled four gulden in Hungarian currency.)
On this same estate at Trentschin we rented two other houses for a
year, namely at Dubnitz and Teplitz, each at one hundred imperial talers.
At Farkeschin, we took over the farmstead and mill for three years
from Stanzel [Stanislaus] Thurzo, the count palatine: the farmstead for
three hundred gulden a year and the mill for a quarter share of the flour.
We also had to work all the fields in return for our quarter share. The
owner provided three-quarters of the seed and took three-quarters of all
grain produced. These were very harsh terms, but we were willing to do
our utmost and more for the count palatine, who as ruler in the land had
admitted us into Hungary (against the emperor's wishes) by written letter
of permission at a time when we were being persecuted.
Thus in the cold and near-famine conditions of that winter, in spite of
poverty and many obstacles, our communities' began anew in Hungary.
But Emperor Ferdinand, urged on by Cardinal von Dietrichstein, tried
to continue persecuting us. He was like Satan, who was not content even
when Job had lost his sons and daughters, his camels, sheep, and cattle,
and all his goods and property, but persisted until he had power over Job's
body as well and brought him to the dung heap. Toward the year's end, in
December 1622, he kept on sending open decrees to the Hungarian lords to
drive us from their estates and out of the country. Through God's special
providence, however, they had safeguarded their country's freedom of
religion with military strength and refused to comply unless the emperor
summoned a general meeting of the Diet.
***************

1623 Intense suffering in Hungary because of war
During October and November of 1623 the forces of both the
emperor and Bethlen Gabor (which had been a cause of anxiety to us the

whole year) advanced to the attack in Hungary. This proved a disastrous
time for the church as well as for other people in the country. Several
farmsteads and houses which we had just taken on and were newly
occupying were burned to the ground by foreign troops, and most of the
others were pillaged. In several places, when we had taken flight to the
woods, the local people stole from our houses and fields anything the
foreign soldiers, such as Turks and Tartars had left. The ravages of this
war reduced many of our people to destitution and cost many their lives,
for thirty of them were carried off captive by the Turks and Tartars and
some were murdered. A great fire broke out in the camp at Branc castle,
where refugees from Sabatisch were living. 31 people died a dreadful
death in the flames and large supplies of cloth, linen, and such things were
destroyed, making a loss of at least twenty thousand gulden.
As a result of this wicked war, the church lost 69 souls in October and
November of this year 1623. They were taken captive, burned or shot.
Thirty souls, young and old, were never accounted for, most of them
women and girls. We entrust them to the Lord in heaven, who can free
them from all distress and turn their days of sorrow into everlasting joy.
So the church - already desperately poor - suffered immense and
irreplaceable losses in many communities through pillage, robbery, fires,
and other ordeals. Then, as if that were not enough, there came an
extremely severe winter with some forty snowfalls, the worst in living
memory. The first snow stayed on the ground for over three months. There
was so much snow in the whole country that all the ditches and deep lanes
were filled and the fences covered until only one level expanse remained.
In this year 1623 a few of our people moved back to Moravia at the
request of several prominent lords (such as Prince Karl von Liechtenstein
and Lord Adam von Waldstein) who employed us on their farms, and in
mills and wine cellars and promised us escort and protection as well as
freedom of religion. Most of the local inhabitants were pleased and hoped
things would improve in Moravia.
During our banishment Moravia was burdened with all kinds of
excessive taxes and terrorized by great numbers of soldiers, Poles, and
other wicked people, worse than ever before. So our people recognized -

and many prominent and knowledgeable lords in Moravia said, too - that
God had shown his special love and care for us when he led us out of
Moravia and saved us from this oppression, since we would have been hit
the hardest. The Lord in heaven knows what is best for us and will not
desert us if we remain true to him, keep his commandments, and do not
forsake him.
***************

1624 Hutterites in Moravia given two weeks to leave
In 1624 the evil, oppressive war, which had lasted for six years, was
still dragging on. As described earlier, it had begun in Bohemia in 1618
and engulfed many lands and kingdoms. Yet the Lord's church did not
suffer any particular attack, because, for the time being, the Hungarians
were quiet and no foreign armies invaded their country. The year was not
without its troubles, however, for the hate and envy of the ancient serpent
against the faithful continued to grow. In March, Cardinal von
Dietrichstein, that enemy of the faithful, issued yet another strict mandate
in Moravia in the name of Emperor Ferdinand II: Since several Moravian
lords (as was mentioned above under the year 1623) had again taken our
people into service as farm workers, millers, cellarers, gardeners,
carpenters, brickmakers, and so on; and since the great shortage of food in
Hungary had resulted in many of our people returning in small groups to
Moravia; all who declared themselves members of the Hutterian
brotherhood were once more ordered, on pain of death, to leave Moravia
within two weeks of the date on which the decree was issued. Anyone
caught after the appointed time was to be killed without trial - hanged on
the nearest tree or burned to death.
As most of the lords could not resist such a strict mandate, a good
number of our people were forced to move out.
They returned to Hungary, where God the Lord still had a place
prepared in the wilderness for his little flock, but where they were in great

danger and lost much property because of the imperial soldiers.
This expulsion from Moravia brought further separation between the
faithful and the unfaithful. Many who loved their stomachs and the
pleasures of the world more than God and his righteousness deserted their
faith and their brothers and sisters rather than return to Hungary. Those
who were loyal and upright willingly submitted, praising God that they
still had a place where they could serve him.
The Moravian lords, among them Prince Maximilian von
Liechtenstein, Lord Adam von Waldstein (chief steward of Bohemia),
Lord Karl von Zerotin, and others, paid little heed to the above mandate.
They let the cardinal write and make his commands but kept our people in
service because of their industry, loyalty, and honesty. So this year, in spite
of the cardinal's strict orders, it was impossible to drive all our people
from Moravia and Austria, whereas toward the end of the same year, when
the Lutheran and Calvinist pastors became the main target of strong
religious persecution, these had to leave the country.
Just as in the preceding years (and as was briefly mentioned at the
end of 1623), the church community was hard-pressed by the continuing
famine, for the heavy, long-lasting continued. snows and the severe winter
ruined the beautiful winter grain, especially the rye. In many places both
in our own and other areas there were wide fields with nothing to cut, and
only in a very few could enough be gathered for seed. As a result the price
of wheat rose to 4 talers for a bushel and a half and rye to 3 and a half
talers in the former, good currency of imperial talers and ducats.
The faithful would have suffered greatly from hunger and lack of
bread if the almighty God, who knows best in everything, had not allowed
the summer crops, grapes, and other fruit to grow plentifully this year. We
ground barley, millet, oats, buckwheat, peas, and lentils together to bake
bread. It would have been quite impossible for the communities to buy so
much expensive rye with the very small income they had at that time.
All the believers have every reason to thank God the rest of our lives
for graciously helping us through the long, lean times and providing us
with our humble share, so we did not have to dishonor his holy name by

begging bread at other people's doors. May we remain entrusted to his
grace.
***************

1625 Cardinal attempts to drive believers out of Hungary
In the last quarter of the year 1625, at Cardinal von Dietrichstein's
instigation, a new decree and strict mandate was issued in Moravia and
Austria in the name of Emperor Ferdinand II.
It stated once again that anyone belonging to our church and
brotherhood who refused to become Roman Catholic was to leave the
aforesaid countries and not be seen there after the given date on pain of
death. At the same time, the government in Vienna sent a sheriff (instead
of a provost) to different places in Austria, particularly to those lords who
still had brothers and sisters in their employment and were giving them
lodging on their land (for instance, the three princes von Liechtenstein,
Karl, Maximilian, and Gundacker) with imperial orders to dismiss our
people from their estates. The sheriff took down particulars of each
brother and sister in the lord's service and threatened that if any such
people were found on his return, they would be put in irons and sent to
prison in Vienna.
So against their will, the lords von Liechtenstein, whose estates we
had never left since the great troubles of 1556, turned us out of their
farms, mills, and all services.
The lord cardinal, this bitter enemy of the faithful, had arranged a
meeting of the provincial Diet at Olmutz and wanted to aim his arrows
with all their force against the church and all who would neither worship
the image of the beast nor receive its mark. Then the Lord God let him
hear the tumult of his enemies - the storm of approaching war - and
immediately he had to postpone the persecution he had planned. The Diet
broke up with nothing decided, for it was the will of the Lord, our faithful
God, who does nothing without good cause, that this evil against his

people should be frustrated and Ahithophel's counsels against the Godfearing David should become mere folly.
***************

1626 General Albrecht enters Hungary with large army
During the spring and summer of the year 1626 the church
community had quite a long respite from the dangers of war and other
troubles. All kinds of summer crops thrived and provided plenty of food.
This lasted until autumn.
In September the imperial general, Albrecht von Wallenstein, Duke of
Friedland, advanced unexpectedly into this country of Hungary with a
great army of about fifty thousand infantry and cavalry and many large
pieces of artillery. He encamped along several miles of the road on this
side of the Waag River, from Hungarian Neustadt down to Schella. Prince
Bethlen [Gabor] was encamped on the other side, also with a very large
force of Hungarians, Turks, Nansfeld's Germans, and other troops. This
confrontation lasted four months, right into the cold of winter.
Our places on both sides of the mountains were again sacked by
imperial soldiers. Much of the food that we had sweated to grow and
harvest was carried off. This autumn and winter from early September
until the end of the year were full of fear and misery. The entire
community had to flee from one place to another during those four months
- women and children, the old and the sick. We did not have enough food
or drink. We suffered cold and privation. Yet we were glad and deeply
thankful to God that our houses were left standing, which meant that we at
least had shelter from the bitter winter. In other ways, too, we felt God's
bountiful help, for however savage and tyrannical the soldiers were
elsewhere - to the extent that even some lords and nobles dared not risk
being seen they were often friendly and even protective toward us. All
praise to the Lord in heaven!
***************

1627 Fire at Tschaskowitz
In 1627 the church community was exposed to further suffering in
this dreadful wartime, for our household at Protzka was plundered on
February 20, and at St. Johannes on April 6. The same happened at Gatte
on April 15.
On May 14, 1627, the church suffered another blow when fire broke
out in our community at Tschäskowitz. It did not spread from any
particular fireplace, and no one knew how it started. The brothers' house
was completely destroyed, and eight - barrels of flour and a horse were
burned. Twenty-four houses in the village were also burned down, and the
brotherhood was more concerned about the peasants' houses than about
their own great loss. But this eventful year of 1627 ended happily, with
heavy yields of grain and low prices for all field crops. Only the grape
harvest was poor, and wine became quite expensive.
***************

1628 Cardinal issued another severe decree
In 1628, the church community was left in peace for the most part
(the Lord be praised!) and our numbers were beginning to grow. But Satan
with his jealous nature could not tolerate it. He renewed his attacks as he
had done against faithful Job. Toward the close of the year, Cardinal Franz
von Dietrichstein, bishop of Olmütz and governor of Moravia, etc issued a
letter (dated December 17 from his palace at Kremsier) on behalf of His
Majesty the Holy Roman Emperor. The letter ran as follows:
Inasmuch as His Imperial Majesty, King of Moravia and Bohemia,
reissued his written orders on the fourth day of this month of December,
while his open decrees have repeatedly made known the extreme severity
of his ban against the Anabaptists (here known as Hutterian Brethren), a

ban applying throughout the Holy Roman Empire, and expressly including
the hereditary margraviate of Moravia;
Inasmuch as the said Anabaptists are not only daring to infiltrate
again but have also accepted agricultural and other tasks in various
capacities in castles and on farms and estates, and have been retained by
the lords and other inhabitants of Moravia:
Therefore, to counter such deliberate disobedience, we judge it fit to
have recourse to a severe open decree with this additional clause:
Whosoever harbors Anabaptists must expel them within six weeks of the
date of this letter. No delay is to be permitted, nor exemption for any
person, lay or clerical. No further harboring must occur on pain of extreme
punishment and His Imperial Majesty's grave displeasure.
Following this letter patent, all our people who had been finally
employed in mills, farms, and other occupations finally vacated Moravia
and moved to the church community in Hungary.
***************

1629 Strange affair at VelkÈ Lev·re concerning prayer
During the first week of the new year 1629, an unusual matter arose
at Velké Leváre, the like of which had never happened before. It began
with ten people and soon spread to other places. Therefore the elders had
to look into it right away.
To explain briefly, this group separated itself from other brothers and
sisters and adopted a peculiar way of praying. They chose unusual hours to
meet for prayer in corners or secretly in the woods, whether or not their
work allowed time for it. They let nothing stop them but insisted that they
owed obedience and service to God rather than to men. Three millers at
Marchegg held such views. They often followed this singular practice, and
instead of looking after the mill as they should have done, they let it run
while empty. When they were rebuked, they answered that they had to hold

their worship service. They were told that there was a time for prayer and
a time for work and running the mill, and besides, it was not necessary for
all three to go and pray together. But they were not willing to give up their
practice.
This going off together and separating from their fellow workers
caused division and quarreling, not only among the mill workers, but also
among those working at other trades in Velké Leváre, where some had
similar ideas. Since this practice was hypocrisy and no service to God at
all, the whole question was laid before dear brother Valentin Winter. He
came at once to Velké Leváre with a number of elders and summoned the
three millers from Marchegg and the others involved in separate prayer
groups. He appealed to them in different ways and pointed out that while
prayer, if it comes from a pure heart, is in itself good and useful, yet
everything has its time. As the wise preacher in Ecclesiastes 3 says,
Everything under the sun has its right time. So it is with prayer, too. If
instead of working side by side, someone leaves his brother with all the
work and goes off for an hour or two into a corner or into a wood,
apparently to pray, and in so doing burdens and annoys his brother this is
no worship of God but a curse. After all this and more which cannot all be
told, enough had been said to wean these people from their wrong ideas,
but not one of them would give in.
They all persisted in their opinion and said that God had revealed it to
them, that they had had a vision, and that the last day was soon to come.
Soon their belief would be proved right.
Brother Valentin, the other servants of the Word, and many trusted
brothers appealed to them in an earnest and kindly way with words from
Scripture and many sound arguments, but to no avail. So the men were
dismissed and given the night to consider the matter.
Next morning they were summoned and again addressed gently and
sharply. They were asked what conclusion they had come to, and whether
they were ready to change their minds so as not to bring disruption to the
church, which was founded on the true cornerstone, Jesus Christ, and
established through the blood of many faithful witnesses and martyrs. If

so, a way could be found to close the matter. But good advice was lost on
them. They persisted in their wrong beliefs.
As the ten people would not accept brotherly correction, the church in
Velké Leváre was called together. When they would not listen to the
church either, they were excluded. Two, named Jakob and David, had the
most guilt and were chiefly responsible for misleading the others. None of
them found repentance; they went further astray in the world. At first they
held strictly to communal life, but their community soon broke up because
they were not founded on the true rock, Jesus Christ. And then, as they had
to earn their own food and clothing, their hours of prayer soon came to an
end.
This story shows how clever Satan is at contriving ways to sow
confusion among the faithful. Here in a very subtle way he attacked them
through the question of prayer and what appeared as worship to bring
about the fall of these poor souls, dragging them overboard from the ship
of Jesus Christ. Therefore every Christian needs to be firmly grounded in
faith in order to resist the cunning attacks of Satan and to obey Christ's
words, Take care that you are not misled. For many will come in my name,
saying, 'I am he,' and, 'The time is drawing near.' Do not follow them.
***************

1630 Disastrous flood at Sabatisch
At Sabatisch about midday on April 15, 1630, a sudden downpour
caused a huge flood while nearly all the brothers and sisters had gathered
at other places for the Lord's Supper. The workshops of the rope maker,
binder, potter, and hatter - mostly new buildings - became so sodden that
they collapsed. Other buildings were badly damaged, and the walls were
undermined by the water even though they remained standing. The damage
cost the church hundreds of gulden. The few people who were left at home
were terrified. One old brother was crushed under a falling building and
killed. Imagine how many would have lost their lives if the downpour had

occurred at night! It would hardly have been possible to escape from such
a flood in time. Many household goods were swept away and not found
again. May the almighty God protect us in the future from such disasters.
***************

1631 Valentin Winter passed away/Heinrich Hartmann
appointed elder
In 1631, on November 29 at four in the morning, dear brother
Valentin Winter, a faithful servant of the Gospel and Elder of the church,
fell asleep in the Lord with a peaceful heart at the age of fifty-two. He had
declared his good conscience to the elders who had visited him during his
illness and had thanked them repeatedly for all the love he had received
from the church. He asked them to say farewell and give the Lord's
greeting of peace to the whole church on his behalf. Brother Valentin had
been a servant of the Gospel for nearly twenty-one years and for ten years
had been entrusted with the oversight and leadership of the church.
What he and the other brothers and sisters went through when the
church in Moravia suffered persecution, acute shortage of food, and the
unrest of war can be understood not only from this chronicle. Any
sensitive person can well imagine the hardships and struggles that result
from such severe persecution.
When through God's loving will dear brother Valentin Winter had
been peacefully taken from this vale of tears, there was a meeting at
Sabatisch of all servants of the Word and servants for temporal needs,
stewards, buyers, and storekeepers, as well as many trusted brothers from
all communities. They met before God to choose a new shepherd for his
church. After thorough consideration, in which a unanimous and joyful
testimony was given, they laid this task on dear brother Heinrich
Hartmann. On December 3, 1631, he was asked to care for the church of
the Lord faithfully in all things.

***************

1632 Protzka plundered
On March 5, 1632, when everyone was fast asleep, a mob of newly
recruited Hungarian and Croatian soldiers pillaged our place at Protzka,
stealing a large amount of linen, clothing, and other things. This was
reported to the old lord, Emmerich Czobor, who thereupon summoned his
hussars, nobles, and some of his retainers and sent them after the robbers.
They caught them, took back most of the plunder, and returned part of it to
the brothers. The hussars and nobles did not forget their own interests but
paid themselves in good measure for their trouble. So the brothers at
Protzka suffered a great loss. It can be appreciated, however, that the lord
was loyal to the brothers and took their part, for this made others afraid to
attack us.
***************

1633 Isaak Baumann incident
Around Easter 1633, a sad affair for the church occurred at Alwinz,
Transylvania, caused by a thoughtless letter that Isaak Baumann, then
elder in Alwinz, had written to some friends. In transit the letter was left
lying in a house for a time and was opened. Its contents had painful
consequences for the church community, which was accused of base
treachery. The case was settled, but only at great expense. When brother
Heinrich Hartmann, Elder of the whole church in Hungary, heard about it,
he conferred with the other elders and they decided that two brothers
should go to Transylvania. Brother Kunz Porth and Jakob Mathroner, both
servants of the Word, were sent to inquire into the matter. When they had
done this, brother Isaak was excluded by unanimous decision of the
church. The service of the Word was taken from him and entrusted to
Georg Geher, who assisted him. Isaak sincerely repented, was reaccepted,

and fell asleep in the Lord with peaceful heart in the following year, 1634.
Much could be written of the fear and damage suffered by the church, but
a short account is included as a warning for all of us that we should not
write to other countries about subjects which are none of our business. We
should leave the world to manage its own affairs, and remember the
saying: A thoughtless deed brings untold need. Having finished their task,
the brothers returned home to Hungary.
***************

1633 Show of resistance at Sabatisch
In the same year the Lord's church community was involved in a
very ugly affair at Sabatisch, somewhat similar to the one just recorded.
Here is a brief account.
On December 18 in the preceding year, Lord Franz Nágy-Michaly,
one of the lords of Branc, had demanded that the brothers provide six
horses and take him over the mountains to Ziffer. Humbly and respectfully,
the Sabatisch brothers refused, explaining that as they had thirteen lords at
Branc it was impossible to do compulsory labor for them all. The brothers
had therefore signed a contract with them which granted exemption from
such services; the community paid a yearly rent instead, and Lord Franz
Nágy-Michaly could not require any services, from them. At this refusal
the lord flew into a great rage. On the day fixed for his journey he arrived
at our community at Sabatisch accompanied by some hussars who were to
help him seize our horses. He struck at any brothers he met.
The steward at Sabatisch had died only the night before and brother
Heinrich Hartmann lay sick in bed, so at this critical moment there was no
brother to take the situation in hand. Our people began crowding together
shouting, The hussars have come! They're going to take our horses! This
brought the threshers running with their flails and the farm hands with
hoes, sticks, forks, and other implements to protect the horses. Few of
them recognized their manorial lord: they thought he was a thieving

hussar. As soon as some of the brothers realized who he was, they stopped
the uproar and all the implements were put aside. Not a hand was laid on
Lord Franz or on the hussars. But he was so outraged by the uproar that he
rode off with his hussars in a fury. For the next two or three hours all he
could think of was revenge. He sent his hussars back to Sabatisch from
Rabenska with orders to take the brothers' pigs from their meadow. The
hussars promptly took them. The swineherds ran home crying, They've
taken the pigs! Several brothers, along with neighbors and some of Lord
Ludwig Niáry's servants, gave chase and seized the pigs back. The raiders
were handled so roughly that they fled with bleeding heads, leaving the
pigs behind. When they returned in this state to Lord Franz, without the
expected pigs, he was still more enraged. He swore a violent oath that he
would avenge himself on the brothers - which he accomplished only too
well. Dear brother Heinrich on his sick bed was horrified at what had
happened, for although the brothers had not laid hands on their manorial
lord, only tried to protect their own horses and pigs, he could imagine the
consequences well enough. He therefore had the whole story written down
from beginning to end and sent it to the lords Tardy as well as to Lord
Ludwig Niáry and Lord Bernhard Niáry, expressing regret for the show of
violence. The lords from both families reassured the brothers, telling them
not to be afraid, they had done nothing wrong in resisting such an attack;
but soon afterwards the lords Tardy took a different view, as will be seen.
Nothing happened until the following year, on August 22, 1633. Then
all the Tardys who were lords of the Branc estate came to the market place
at Senitz. With their assistance and that of his lady mother, Lord Franz
Nágy-Michaly set up a court with twelve members of the nobility acting as
jurors. Although the Niáry lords were called, too, they were not willing to
come.
In spite of their complete innocence, brother Heinrich Hartmann and
his helpers were summoned to attend the court. Brother Heinrich refused,
for he said all the lords were well aware that our contract gave us specific
exemption: We and our brotherhood did not go to law as the world does;
we were not obliged to appear in the district court or in any court of any
lord or nobleman whomsoever, and if someone had just cause against us it
could be settled with the manorial lord without going to court. But no

defense or humble plea could help us. Brother Heinrich and four other
brothers were forced by the hussars to appear before a jury consisting of
the twelve nobles and a lawyer. These sat at a long table. The lords Tardy
and Lord Franz sat aside from the table and listened to the case.
Lord Franz rose, approached the table where the jurors sat, made a
statement, and had the lawyer indict the brothers in Latin. The indictment
was also taken down in Latin. It described how the brothers had run at the
lord of the manor with pitchforks, flails, hoes, sticks, and other tools, with
intent to kill him. The jurors translated the indictment for the brothers and
demanded an answer, although they knew quite well that the defendants
were innocent, since the written report which the brothers had sent to the
lords had been read to the court.
Brother Heinrich answered courteously and respectfully, My dear
nobles of the jury and other lords present, you all know well how my
brothers and I have begged with all submission to be exempt from going to
court, since we are not instructed in the legal practices of the world or in
Hungarian law, and it is against our consciences and against our contract to
go to court with our manorial lord or anyone else. As I and the brothers
with me have been brought by force and are pressed for an answer before
this court and all the lords present, I humbly ask that it will not be held
against me if I say something not quite correct according to law, for I have
never learned the art of speaking.
They told him to speak freely, so he said, Dear lords, you are well
aware that we have some twelve or thirteen manorial lords in Branc, and
each one wants to have sole authority. As it would be impossible for us to
do compulsory labor for so many lords, we made a contract to pay a fixed
yearly sum in addition to the rent for our houses. All the lords agreed to
this and made a contract with us. In the copy here to hand my lord jurors
can find what privileges they had promised and committed themselves to.
Now, however, contrary to this agreement, we have been ordered to do
compulsory labor by Lord Franz Nágy-Michaly, who even tried to take our
horses from the stables by force.
He himself caused the excited uproar at our place because of the
blows he dealt, and this in spite of our telling him that our steward had

died the night before and lay in the house as yet unburied. I myself was
sick in bed, and therefore nothing could be arranged with Lord Franz. So
along with my brothers here, I have absolutely no guilt in that uproar, and
I have severely disciplined those who were involved. If what happened has
upset our manorial lord, I humbly ask for pardon on behalf of my brothers.
Yet I am also surprised and disturbed that we were forced to attend
the court in spite of the privileges in our contract, for it is expressly stated
there that if one of the brothers Tequires punishment, it should not be
given by the manorial lord, but should be entrusted to the elders. But what
is the use of talking? Neither privileges agreed by contract nor any other
defense is taken into account. The just must stand back and accept
injustice.
The jurors asked all the lords and the brothers to withdraw. The
brothers, however, were carefully guarded so that none of them should
escape. After long consultation the jurors commanded them to reappear
alone and explained to brother Heinrich that under Hungarian law it was
the custom for the parties to seek settlement before judgment was
pronounced and carried out. They advised the brothers not to wait for a
verdict but rather to seek a settlement with Lord Franz. Brother Heinrich
answered, It has always been our wish to avoid going to law; it is not only
against our consciences, but is unseemly for poor tenants to go to law with
their manorial lord. Since we ourselves are innocent and since Lord Franz
started the trouble himself and struck several of our people who were quite
innocent, it would be difficult for us to see our brothers punished,
especially as we have many such young lords who might also seek grounds
to hold us punishable.
In order to find an agreement, and because Lord Franz was much
affronted by what occurred, we would be willing to accommodate him in
some manner. Since the lords of the Niáry family also have part interest in
our community, we cannot act without them. I therefore request a
withdrawal to confer with them.
Brother Heinrich was allowed to do this. He (and one other brother)
went to the Niáry lords, who were also at Senitz. But the other three
brothers remained under close guard.

Brother Heinrich told the two lords about the jurors' advice to offer a
sum of money to Lord Franz by way of settlement. The Niáry lords were
reluctant for us to pay anything; They said, You are innocent, so why
should you give them money? But finally for the sake of peace they
consented to an offer of forty imperial talers in settlement.
***************

1633 Terrible verdict handed down by the jurors
Brother Heinrich and the other brothers appeared before the jurors
and agreed to pay forty imperial talers. The jurors were satisfied, let the
brothers withdraw, and called the lords Tardy with Lord Franz and his lady
mother to inform them of the offer. Lord Franz and his supporters were in
no way appeased. They pressed for a verdict to be pronounced and the
sentence carried out.
The brothers were again called before all the lords Tardy, and told
they were to hear the verdict. The lawyer rose and read it out in Latin to
everyone. A translation was given the brothers as follows:
According to present impartial judgment, it is understood that the
brothers wanted, in their community, to strike their manorial lord dead,
and therefore it is decided that all of them - men, women, and children are liable to the death penalty. However, the court will show them mercy
by having only twelve leading brothers beheaded. Alternatively it will be
yet more merciful and grant the twelve brothers their lives on the sole
condition of a payment of forty gulden from each male person over twelve
years of age.
This verdict was sealed by all jurors. Each had to sign it with his own
hand. The document, complete with its fourteen seals, was delivered to
Franz Nágy-Michaly.
The brothers had also complained to the court about the attempted
theft of our pigs, although they were afraid they would be found guilty for

wounding the hussars. But the jurors said the hussars got what they
deserved and no one had committed a crime against them. Violence may
be met with violence. No subject, however, has the right to rebel against
his manorial lord. With that the jurors rose.
Brother Heinrich Hartmann and two other brothers were arrested by
the jurors before anyone left the room, and were delivered to the judge at
Senitz to be imprisoned. He had them heavily guarded day and night by
soldiers, as though they were criminals. The other two brothers who had
been in court were set free, but they did not want to leave the imprisoned
brothers. In the end they were put in prison with them.
The lords Tardy and Lord Franz and his mother were pleased that the
judgment (more properly the misjudgment) was pronounced as described,
and they sat down to eat and drink. The poor brothers were very downcast
and neither ate nor drank the whole day, for the outlook was grim. Next
day the lords sent some of their number to the community at Sabatisch to
record all male persons over twelve years of age. When they reckoned up
forty gulden for each one, it came to a large sum. The brothers, however,
refused to pay anything.
***************

1633 Suffering brought upon the imprisoned by Lord Franz
Nagy-Michaly
The church was in great anxiety about the whole miserable affair.
Every day they pleaded in prayer that God through his grace might deliver
them from their plight. The Niáry lords were much upset at our innocent
brothers' imprisonment. In indignation they left Senitz, assuring us that
they would soon put an end to it. They wrote a stern letter to the lords of
the Tardy family, but it accomplished nothing. In fact, the two families
became enemies on account of the brothers.

The lords of the Tardy family were afraid that the Niáry lords, with
the help of Lord Bernhard Niáry's brother-in-law, Lord Sigmund Luni,
would use force to take our brothers from the Senitz prison, for Lord
Sigmund had just arrived from Upper Hungary with forty hussars and had
also written a stiff letter to the Tardy lords. They decided to take the
brothers to a place on the far side of the mountains. After four days in
prison at Senitz the brothers (Heinrich Hartmann; Jakob Mathroner, who
was also a servant of the Word; Hans Scheuffel, a secretary; Paul Wenzel,
head potter; and Elias Ottwinowsky, head rope maker) were put on a
wagon and taken over the mountains to the mill of Lord Franz NágyNichaly at Koczknowa. All the Tardy lords and Franz Nágy-Nichaly went
along and had the brothers accompanied by armed guards so that none
should escape on the way.
At the mill, the five brothers were put in a cellar previously used for
dogs, where they were locked in every night. Franz Nágy-Michaly came
frequently with lords from other areas to show them the brothers, saying in
mockery that he had captured the king of the Anabaptists and his
councilors, who had tried to kill him, and that was why under Hungarian
law they had been handed over to him as his prisoners. So besides being
innocent, the brothers were mocked and intimidated. At one point, Lord
Nágy-Michaly threatened to put them in chains and force them to do heavy
labor while fettered. Another time he threatened to flog them and said that
if they were not ransomed, he would sell them for a good price to a
Hungarian captain at a border fortress. He brought this captain for the
brothers to see, as though he was going to conclude the sale. The poor
brothers bore it all with patience and were resolved not to pay a penny.
Meanwhile, the lords of the Niáry family continually tried to secure
the brothers' release. They wanted to open a fresh lawsuit against the
Tardys but did not succeed. They went to the lord palatine, who gave them
a written command for Lord Franz to set the brothers free, but even this
was of no avail. Lord Franz haughtily said that neither the king of Hungary
nor the lord palatine had any authority in a matter that had already been
decided in his favor by a Hungarian court.

Nonetheless, he was anxious lest the brothers be taken by force from
the mill and so get free. After they had been three weeks in prison, he
came early one morning (with the judge) and asked brother Heinrich
Hartmann, Well, what are you going to do? Aren't you ready to make an
agreement with me? Heinrich answered that he had told the lord many
times he owned nothing but the clothes on his back and therefore had
nothing to give. The judge had in his hand two chains used for hobbling
horses at pasture. Lord Franz ordered, Judge, put one on the old man's feet
and one on the other's feet. (He meant to put them on brother Heinrich and
brother Jakob Mathroner.) Hans Scheuffel asked that brother Heinrich be
spared on account of his age. If there was no other way, he (Hans) would
wear the chains for him. Then the chains were put on brother Jakob and
Hans Scheuffel.
All three were hurried by wagon to a village called Wystock; Lord
Franz and several hussars escorted them. At Wystock they were handed
over to the magistrate, who put them into a dark room for four hours. The
brothers were very worried. They had no idea where they would be taken
next. They were afraid it would be far away from the church community,
over the Danube or even to Vienna, for they had often been threatened with
this. Lord Franz left them in the hands of the magistrate, hungry and
thirsty and guarded by a few hussars, while he rode to Bibersburg Castle to
ask the county governor, count Stefan Palffy, to take the brothers into
custody in his castle, and this was granted. On his return, Lord Franz told
the magistrate that he would have the brothers transferred to the castle.
The magistrate secretly passed the news on to the brothers, for they had
begged him to let them know anything he discovered. The brothers were
relieved it was no further.
Lord Franz commanded the magistrate to put the brothers on a
wagon, and this was done. The lord and his hussars escorted them. When
they reached the castle they had to wait at the gate for a long time, and
everybody came running out to see the sight. The brothers were
embarrassed but took comfort in the knowledge of their innocence and
spoke to the people in this sense.

The warden of the castle, a very ill-tempered man from Moskowitz,
appeared, shouted coarse abuse at them, threw a pair of heavy iron chains
down in front of each, and said, Now you are prisoners and in my hands.
His Grace, my lord, has given me orders to have you put in chains, and you
will have to work in them, chopping wood, carting rock and limestone, and
carrying water, wood, or anything else needed in the castle. The brothers'
hearts sank at such a reception. As there was no smith to put the chains on
them straightaway, the warden took a key and told them to follow him. He
led them to a stinking dungeon and locked them in. The brothers began to
feel faint from the stench and filth, for they had had nothing to eat all day.
Now the steward from Kesselsdorf happened to be at the castle for
some reason. When he saw how they were treated, and what fear they were
in, he was filled with sympathy. He went straight to Count Stefan Palffy
and Lord Franz, asking respectfully that they at least have the compassion
to take the brothers out of the stinking dungeon. Although they refused to
show mercy, he would not give up but went a second and a third time to
the two lords. Finding how he persisted in his request, they at last allowed
brother Heinrich to be let out of the dungeon because of his age. The
warden immediately came to let him out, and did not re-lock the prison
door but permitted the other two brothers to sit under the prison archway
so that they got some air. And as he had heard a little about the brothers'
innocence, he let them out completely. The steward also managed to bring
them some bread and wine to strengthen them. He took leave of them with
tears in his eyes. When he got home to Kesselsdorf he told of their plight,
and all the brotherhood was greatly distressed on their account.
The next day the warden put the three brothers in the guardhouse,
where they were free to move around although two were still in chains.
Lord Franz kept the other two brothers, Paul and Elias, as prisoners in
his mill at Koczknowa. They had hoped to be released sooner than brother
Heinrich and those with him, but they were disappointed. Instead they
were falsely accused of writing to Lord Niáry saying that Lord Franz had
forced them into dancing and other vices during their imprisonment. He
had not done so, and the brothers had never said he had, but Lord Franz
would not accept their truthful disclaimer. He ordered them to be thrown

to the ground and mercilessly flogged, then cast into an even worse
dungeon than before. His wife, who realized that the brothers were
innocent, pleaded on their behalf to no avail. When brother Heinrich and
his companions heard about this, they were terribly afraid that in his rage
Lord Franz would do the same to them. But God be praised, a settlement
was found.
Brother Simon Lorcher, the elder at Kesselsdorf, appealed so
persistently to his manorial lord, Count Hans Palffy, that the latter wrote a
letter advising Lord Franz to send Paul Wenzel and Elias Ottwinowsky to
join the other brothers at the castle and unshackle the two who were there
in irons. This was done immediately, and although there was small hope of
complete freedom they thanked God that he had brought them together
again. All the elders did their utmost, making journeys and sending
messages wherever they thought something might be achieved toward
freeing the brothers. Little came of it because the Niáry lords were against
a settlement with the Tardy lords and so kept holding out hopes to the
brothers that it could all be settled by law without costing us anything.
They could not achieve this, however, and it was not possible for us to
wait for the end of their legal process, as Hungarian law proceedings often
take many years. In the end there was no other way than to make an
agreement with the Tardy lords and Lord Franz Nágy-Michaly.
After various efforts on the part of the Niáry lords and the elders, the
prince palatine as ruler of the country finally ordered Count Stefan Palffy
as county governor to settle the matter. The Count sent for Lord Franz and
his lady mother, and they arrived at Bibersburg Castle. He urged them to
accept a settlement. When they demanded a large sum of money, brother
Heinrich Hartmann flatly refused, saying he would not buy his own
release, for he owned nothing but what he stood up in.
The wife of Count Stefan Palffy also took up the brothers' cause,
making pleas and writing letters to other lords and ladies, leaving no stone
unturned in an effort to reach a settlement. Some brothers took up the
matter too; they saw there was no other way to free the prisoners except by
paying Lord Franz compensation, for he was pressing a complaint that the
costs of the law case and the care of the wounded hussars had been high.

The brothers therefore offered to forgo the little he owed those who
worked for him and to compensate him with some imperial talers in
addition. He and the other lords were satisfied with this, and the matter
was settled. The Lord be praised!
Two identical contracts were drawn up, which Count Stefan Palffy
and Lord Franz endorsed with their own hands and sealed with their
ancestral seals. One was given to Lord Franz, the other to the brothers.
This took place on October 8, 1633, at Bibersburg Castle in the presence of
Count Stefan Palffy, Lord Franz Nágy Michaly and other eminent and
noble lords, also of the five imprisoned brothers. Then the brothers were
released and returned to the church with unblemished consciences and in
great joy. All the faithful praised and thanked God.
The incident is recorded in this book to let our descendants know
what a Hungarian court can do and how easily a poor tenant can incur guilt
toward his manorial lord. Although the brothers were innocent, as has been
sufficiently stated, and although many high-ranking, honorable people
attested to it, we still came off worst and had to go through fear and loss in
the process. But in the end Lord Franz Nágy-Michaly and his supporters
earned more shame and dishonor than praise and profit. *

TO THE READER
It should not be thought that the church community approved of its
members joining together to oppose their manorial lord. Those who did so
had no real fear of God in their hearts. At first sight one might suppose the
brotherhood believed them to be in the right, but when these brothers are
described as innocent this must be understood as innocent in the eyes of
the world and its law, because they had not recognized their manorial lord
and had no intent to kill the men they resisted. Although they were not
guilty of the two offenses with which they were charged, they still acted
against the Gospel and against their faith and consciences by using force
to defend themselves. Therefore the elders brought the matter before the
church and earnestly warned everyone to keep from such actions in the
future. And although the subject is not pursued in the first Hutterian

Chronicle, it is dealt with in another writing. I believe it necessary to
include these considerations to show how strongly the elders and all the
brotherhood disapproved of these actions.
***************

1633 Statement presented to the brotherhood at VelkÈ
Lev·re
On November 28, 1633, at Velké Leváre, it was agreed at a
conference to lay the following points before the Church
Dear Brothers,
There is urgent cause for us to have the following points not only read
but also followed out in every community of the Lord.
A short time ago an incident occurred in the church community which
was against our calling, against the Lord's Word, and against the spirit of
Christ, for brothers resisted the magistrates, their attendants and similar
people by rushing together to defend themselves with blows and a great
show of violence.
As a result we not only have a sin against God on our consciences but
have also made ourselves liable to the utmost penalty of the law and have
caused the highest authorities in the land to regard us as insolent,
rebellious people and arrogant scoundrels.
We now have to fear that the incident will lead to serious trouble for
God's church community, including our many widows and orphans.
If this should happen (and people in high positions in this country are
speaking and agitating in this direction), if we ourselves are responsible
for disaster overwhelming the church, we cannot find comfort for our
consciences in the Gospel and teachings of Christ, since we are not

suffering for the sake of truth - least of all those who have defiled
themselves with such actions.
For Christ the Lord teaches us: You have heard Matthew that it used
to be said, 'An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.' But (I say to you),
Do not resist evil. If anyone hits you on the right cheek, turn and offer him
your left.' And, a verse or two further on: Give to the man who asks
anything from you, and do not turn away from the man who wants to
borrow. Do good to those who hate you and pray for those who persecute
you. (5:38-45)
We have to understand this as applying in the strictest way to the
authorities (even more than to soldiers and robbers). No kind of pretext or
excuse gives us freedom to oppose the magistrates or defend ourselves
from them.
Paul says, Anyone who resists the authorities resists what God has
appointed, and those who so resist incur the judgment. (Romans 13:2)
The apostle Peter instructs us: Submit to every man-made authority
for the Lord's sake, whether to the sovereign as supreme ruler or to the
governor as his deputy - submit not only to those who are good and kind,
but also to those who are harsh. For it is God's will that by doing right you
should silence the ignorant talk of foolish men. Do this as free men and
never use your freedom to cover up wrongdoing. Be thankful to endure
undeserved suffering for the sake of your consciences before God. It is no
credit to sin against the authorities and afterwards to suffer from a beating
or other punishment for the offense but suffering for doing right is a grace
from God. (1 Peter 2)
In 1595 the elders gave a strong warning to our church community
not to reply with rough, offensive words when people take our goods by
force; for example, when the magistrates confiscate goods for dues and
taxes.
If soldiers rob us, or swear at us and revile us, we should not let
ourselves answer back in kind, which might easily provoke them to harm

the church community. Every brother and sister should take good note of
this.
It should not be that all and sundry rush off without asking advice to
complain or make accusations to a magistrate about what has been done to
them (if a few things have been taken). This often brings us into deep
trouble, and even directly after the event it is very difficult to prove our
case. Our forefathers recognized this and often warned us of it.
Even if we have to bear some damage and loss of our possessions,
there is more blessing and solace in keeping our consciences pure and
undefiled, for it is written:
You joyfully accepted the plundering of your property, knowing that
you possessed something better and more lasting, a sure, enduring treasure
in heaven. (Hebrews 10:34)
We see, then, what harm is done to our consciences and how little is
gained with the authorities by banding together for defense, pushing,
chasing, and striking servants of the manor. (In Sabatisch even a lord of
the manor was treated in this way.)
We see right in front of our eyes how this behavior imperiled the lives
of the church Elder and four of our brothers. Our Elder was taken around
the country as a spectacle and a laughingstock. It seemed at one time as if
he and some of the imprisoned brothers would be bartered with the Turks
at a frontier post. All this was done although he and the brothers
incarcerated with him had had no guilt whatsoever in the disturbance. In
spite of their complete innocence they had to suffer disgrace, fear, danger
of death, imprisonment, beatings, and irons because of thoughtlessness.
God came to our defense and we were keenly aware of his help, for if
he had not moved the highest authorities in the land to take up our cause,
the church community would never have escaped tremendous damage:
confiscation of our goods, injury and death to brothers in the woods and on
the roads, and the destruction of the Sabatisch community.

Although some highly-placed people took our side, in the end they
could not prevent our paying compensation, and the prince of our country,
the lord palatine, ordered a great lord to arrange the terms. Unwilling as
we were, the brotherhood had no alternative but to accept the arrangement
advised by the lords, for we wanted to protect the community from any
further harm and to retain our home at Sabatisch. They warned us that if
we refused we would be regarded as rebels, people who resisted the
authorities; we would consequently be labeled as Münsterites and
banished from the country. Since there was no other way, we were forced
to agree to a settlement.
We who now write to you received our appointment from the Lord
(through election by the believers). He made us shepherds and watchmen
in the church community. Now hear what he said through the prophets to
the watchmen of Israel: Son of man, tell your people what happens when I
bring war to a land. Its people choose one of their number to be a
watchman. When he sees the enemy approaching, he sounds the trumpet to
warn everyone. If someone hears it, yet pays no attention, and the enemy
comes and kills him, then he is to blame for his own death. The blood guilt
will be on his own head, since he heard the trumpet but did not take
warning. (Ezekiel 33:2)
So we appeal to you, dear brothers, for Jesus Christ's sake, never to
take part in banding together, hitting, pushing, seizing work from people's
hands, or other violence. Shun it as you would sin.
And if someone is moved by economic considerations to ask whether
we should let community property be taken by force, our reply is based on
Jesus' teaching. Yes, that is better and more blessed than defending
ourselves by violence, defiling our consciences, bringing us into danger
with the authorities, and having to pay out incredibly large sums of money.
If anybody has said only one good word in our favor, there is no end to
what we must pay in return, as many know very well.
But if we control ourselves when lords or their servants and peasants
use violence against us, we can go to the magistrates for help and advice
and can hope for better results this way than by putting ourselves in such

danger (of punishment from the magistrates) and injuring our consciences
by defending and avenging ourselves.
For it is a terrible disgrace and incompatible with faith in Jesus Christ
when a worldly court has to condemn a Christian for crime.
Therefore be governed by the authority the Lord has given us through
his Word, and work for the betterment of God's church so that in the future
no brother ever uses force to defend himself from robbery, injustice, and
oppression.
If anyone does not obey our words and instructions (which are not
ours, but God's) we will act on the basis of Scripture and discipline him
with exclusion, following the example of our forefathers which we have
learned in the church. We will leave him to make his own defense before
the magistrates and to set the matter right, because he has sinned and
incurred guilt in the eyes of God, the church, and the authorities. If, once
the matter is cleared with the authorities, he wants to find repentance for
his sin and stupidity, we will gladly help him and provide an opportunity.
We will no longer tolerate people taking axes, hoes, and great, ugly
staves with them when crossing the fields. If someone wishes to go for a
walk, he can go like a brother, as was the custom formerly.
Scarcely anybody is willing to herd the cows unless he has a hoe with
him. This was not an accepted practice in the community in earlier years,
for cattle can be controlled with a halter and rope better than with a hoe.
If the hoe is taken for self-protection, it is likely to bring more harm
than help.
We have even heard that some brothers (especially in isolated places)
carry and use guns. This should not occur, for what business has a brother
with a gun? It has never been tolerated in the church community and
should not be tolerated now.
We, the elders, will no longer stand behind such brawlers with goods
and blood (as we did this time at Sabatisch), but the offender shall bear his

own punishment and put the matter right with the law without making the
innocent suffer. For it is in no way our duty to support him, as has been
sufficiently proved from the writings and example of our forefathers.
Brothers betray their faith if they go so far as to strike down an
attacker, pursue him when he is already fleeing, and even hit him again
and again when he is lying on the ground. Such brothers are not walking in
the light but in darkness, and the darkness has blinded their eyes. We
refuse to share our inheritance with them.
For those believers, however, who are good at heart but have
forgotten themselves and acted rashly from weakness and from zeal to
protect the community's goods, we hope and believe that they will be
warned by the trumpet of the Gospel, and for their salvation's sake will
cease to sin.
Since they have accepted faith in Jesus Christ, giving up all their
possessions for the sake of him who will judge all men on the last day,
each one should take careful note that he said, I do not judge you, but the
words that I have spoken will be your judge on the last day.
We urge you, dear brothers, not only to stop gathering in self-defense
and striking blows, but also to avoid using insulting words and everything
which could infuriate the magistrates, their servants, or any one else.
For when Christ, our way, example, and Savior, was reviled, he did
not revile in return; when he suffered he did not threaten, but trusted him
who judges rightly. (1 Peter 2:23)
Christ also teaches us: I tell you, men will have to render an account
for every careless word they have spoken, for it is your words that will
acquit you and your words that will condemn you. (Matthew 12:36-37)
We should guard against making contemptuous remarks about the
highest or lowest placed officials, no matter who they are. Such talk does
not remain among ourselves. It is clear we are much at fault in this
respect. We may well voice our concern that we claim to be like one loaf
when we break bread at the Lord's Supper, and we declare we are members

of that most glorious body whose head is Jesus Christ, yet nothing is kept
secret among us. What is said in our circle in confidence is allowed to
come to other ears and is even told to the magistrates.
The Jews keep their own counsel much better than we do. Such lack
of silence blemishes and defaces a people of God. Whether those
responsible for it are still members of Christ's body, we leave to each true
believer's own judgment.
Moreover, even if we never let our words go further, belief in Christ
precludes our speaking contemptuously against the authorities.
As Job asks in his book, Is it fitting to say to the king, 'Belial,' and to
the princes, 'You are godless'? Job 34:18
Everything will come to light in its own time. The proverb says, No
thread is spun so fine it won't be seen in bright sunshine. Another saying is
Walls have ears.
Let us look at Christ's words and teaching. He says, There is nothing
hidden which will not become public, nothing secret that will not become
known. (Luke 8:17)
That is why the Scriptures say, Do not curse the king even in your
heart; do not curse the rich even in your bedroom because the birds may
carry your words, and others with wings may repeat them. (Ecclesiastes
10:20)
So we plead with you for your own sake, for your own salvation, that
every believer fears God and avoids these pitfalls as he does other sins;
that he keeps to God's and Christ's commandment: Take off the garments
soiled by sin and put on a garment of innocence, washed white in the blood
of the Lamb, so that no one is found naked when the Day of the Lord shall
come. It would be a pitiable thing if someone here had endured suffering
with the believers in nearly everything and then forfeited his salvation for
such a reason. (Revelation 7:14; 3:18)

To prevent this happening we beg and warn you from our hearts for
the sake of God's honor, in the hope that every believer will accept our
words gladly and try diligently to follow them because it will serve to his
own salvation and the well-being of the church.
***************

1636 Disastrous fire at Sabatisch
On March 27, 1636, another heavy blow struck the church
community of the Lord. At eight in the morning, a fire broke out at
Sabatisch, starting in the house of a neighboring peasant opposite our
threshing yard. More than sixty houses in the village were burned to the
ground. The wind was so strong that day that the fire was first carried to
the straw in our threshing yard, then spread to the stables and hay stacks.
In spite of every effort to control it, nothing could be saved. Within fifteen
minutes our house was in flames and was reduced to ashes. Not enough
roof was left to shelter so much as one person.
All the floors collapsed and not a beam, door frame, or window could
be found afterward. Because of the terrible wind, fire fighting was an
impossibility. People could only try to escape. Nine lost their lives; some
were so consumed by the fire that nothing but a few bones remained. We
worked fast to get at least the children out.
The fire caused the church community severe losses of grain and
flour, cloth, wool, linen, hemp, clothes and bedding, books, copper pots,
valuable tools, livestock, and every kind of household utensil and
provision. All this was destroyed in addition to the well-built houses. Our
people at Sabatisch were left without a bit of bread or a pinch of flour. It is
not possible to describe their poverty.
The elders were in great distress, not knowing how to find shelter for
their people. They all realized they must leave the burned-down houses
and their land at Sabatisch and divide up among other communities. Dear
brother Heinrich Hartmann sent to all the lords of Branc, telling them of

the terrible situation. He asked them to release us so that we could move
elsewhere, since everyone considered it impossible to rebuild the
community to its former state.
The lords showed great sympathy and offered help and materials,
such as wood for building. Lord Ludwig Niáry helped us in the moment of
our greatest need. Our people and children, who had fled from the fire,
were out in the fields in the cold wind, with no place to go. The fire had
not spread to his castle, so he sent his servants to bring them there and let
them have one room to store anything saved from the fire. He lodged not
only brother Heinrich and his family in the castle, but as many others as
possible until enough rebuilding had been done to provide housing for
them.
The nobles and the entire neighborhood at Sabatisch were very
helpful, too, taking our people into their houses and providing for them as
long as there was need. In neighboring villages, particularly at Senitz,
great sympathy was shown. Some of the nobility and others sent bread and
food from their kitchens and showed us kindness in many ways. We saw it
as a special grace of God that in our loss and need we could still count on
our neighbors to such an extent.
The elders heard the generous offer of the lords and their promise to
help us with wood and other building materials and they saw the
neighbors' friendliness and help. They also took into consideration that we
had lived at Sabatisch for more than ninety years. Although these years
had not been without difficulties with the lords, the church community had
met with much kindness and often been given shelter on the Branc estate,
for instance when we were persecuted and driven from Moravia and when
we fled in wartime. With all this in mind, the elders decided that if the
lords would help us by relieving us of all compulsory labor, taxes, and
other demands for two or three years, we would undertake to rebuild at the
site of the fire.
The lords assented. As a result, the brothers made a new agreement
with them and a new contract was drawn up.

Then rebuilding was begun. The old, the sick, and the children were
divided among the other communities, but nearly all the young, strong
people were employed in construction work. So much building was done
in the summer that by winter everyone could be accommodated and the
workshops were set up. May God in his grace protect us in times to come
from such misfortune and damage.
***************

1637 Dry summer, followed by famine
The summers of 1637 and 1638 were extremely dry. Little grain
grew, and most of the fruit and vegetables dried up. There followed a
severe famine, and people went very hungry. It continued into 1639. But
our Lord and faithful God, to whom be everlasting praise, blessed his
church so much through the foresight of the dedicated elders that the
faithful suffered no marked hunger or want. They were even able to help
others in need. It was reckoned that some communities gave alms and
shared their bread with fifty to sixty neighbors, in some cases even up to
eighty adults and children.
The grape harvest, on the other hand, was so plentiful in 1638 that in
Hungary, especially on the other side of the Hungarian mountains, a cask
of wine sold for seven or eight shillings and the Hungarian half-liter cost
one kreuzer. If someone brought two empty casks, he could get one filled
in exchange for the empty one. Our almighty God can help in every need.
To him be eternal praise!
***************

1639 Heinrich Hartmann passed away/Andreas Ehrenpreis
made Elder

At six o'clock in the morning on September 29, 1639, our dear
brother Heinrich Hartmann fell asleep in the Lord at Sabatisch. He had
been a faithful servant of the Gospel and shepherd of the whole church. He
declared his good conscience to the elders who visited him during his
illness, testifying that he was at peace with God and all the faithful. He
thanked them for all the love shown him and asked them to give his
farewell greetings of peace to the brothers and sisters. Then he fell asleep
with a peaceful heart. He was sixty-three years old, had been servant of the
Word for twenty-eight years, and had led the church for two months short
of eight years.
After the peaceful passing of our dear brother Heinrich, all servants
of the Word, servants for temporal needs, stewards, buyers, and
storekeepers and many other trusted brothers from the whole church
gathered at Sabatisch. In earnest prayer they considered the matter, asking
God to give them another faithful shepherd and Elder for the church. The
choice fell on brother Andreas Ehrenpreis, who received a unanimous and
joyful testimony from the brothers. This task of caring faithfully for the
church of the Lord was laid on him on October 4, 1639.
***************

1640 Contribution toward building up fortifications as
Neuhäusel
In 1640, soon after New Year, a session of the regional Diet was held
at Neutra with the governor of the country, the lord palatine, in attendance.
There it was decided that everyone, high or low, must make a contribution
toward building up the fortifications at Neuhäusel against the old enemy.
We brothers were included. Our contribution was to make fifty wagons,
well reinforced with iron, to be used for moving earth and rock. Our elders
talked this over and came to the conclusion that although it would cost us
sweat and hard work, it was not a conscience question. The wagons were to
be used for building purposes and for protection, and as we lived in the
kingdom of Hungary and had found refuge there for our children and our

old and sick members, we could not refuse to obey. We arranged with the
lord palatine and other nobles, however, to reduce the number of wagons
to twenty. We toiled to produce them, and delivered them to the lord
palatine with the hope that we and our poor little flock might also share
the protection against the enemy. This is recorded to inform those who
follow after us. The wagons were valued at six hundred gulden.
***************

1642 Great damage by Swedish Field Marshall
Around Pentecost 1642, terror swept these lands when the imperial
general Duke Franz Albrecht of Saxony and the Swedish field marshal
Lennart Torstenson confronted each other in Silesia and fought a
disastrous battle. Duke Franz Albrecht was mortally wounded. The
imperial army fled in panic. They crossed the March River at Ungarisch
Hradisch into Hungary and came down on our side. Then to the great
alarm of our people, they suddenly arrived at Velké Leváre. However no
particular violence took place this time, although we had to bear the cost
of putting them up. So God in his grace faithfully helped us through our
troubles.
As the Swedish field marshal, General Torstenson, had won a great
victory over the imperial forces and the war continued for several years,
most of our households were plundered by both sides and by peasants as
well, especially at Soblahof, Schächtitz, Tschäskowitz, Velké Leváre, St.
Johannes, and Protzka. Velké Leváre and Schächtitz were plundered twice.
Troops incessantly crossed and recrossed the country, which led to a great
loss of provisions for the communities. Two brothers were murdered at St.
Johannes, and the school as well as the tailors', cobblers', and cutlers'
workshops were burned down at Velké Leváre.
***************

1643 Fire at Sabatisch again
On May 29, 1643 at about one o'clock in the afternoon, a fire broke
out in a neighbor's house in the marketplace at again. Our place (rebuilt
only eight years earlier) again burned down, along with the whole
marketplace except for the church and a few small houses. Because of the
fierce wind and the smoke and dust, no one could put out the fire or save
anything. It is not hard to imagine what a great loss this was for the
church. We accepted it in patience and put ourselves in God's hand.
***************

1645 Benjamin Kengel's false ideas
In June 1645 a problem arose with Benjamin Kengel, a tailor at
Sabatisch. He withdrew from the community's teaching and worship
meetings. When spoken to, he replied that the righteous have no need of
instruction, since the Holy Spirit will teach them, and that the common
prayer is only a human custom, not prompted by the Holy Spirit. He also
maintained that baptism is useless and unnecessary and nothing but a
means of bondage and coercion to bring about human obedience, which is
against the freedom of Christ. He considered all servants of the Word and
teachers as hired laborers and their work as ungodly. He completely
rejected their authority to bind and to loose sin, saying that no man can be
of any help to wash away another's sin. In the same way, he said about the
Lord's Supper that outward ceremonies and formulas are not necessary for
a true Christian. Likewise marriage and what it involves is not fitting for a
Christian, and for this reason he had remained a widower for some years.
In short, in his opinion the church had never been right but had erred in
these and many other things. On the basis of truth - the teaching of Christ,
the example of the first church in Jerusalem, and the work of the Holy
Spirit - Kengel repeatedly received brotherly admonition to give up his
wrong ideas. When he still arrogantly persisted in them, he was excluded
and separated from the church.

He made a passionate plea to be allowed to stay in the community
and live according to his own beliefs, but as he was an evil root and
harmful weed, this was quite out of the question. He sought for true
repentance yet did not find it, although he continued seeking for a long
time, coming before the church and confessing openly that he had been in
error. He said he had imagined that he understood something, and now he
was heartily sorry and for the rest of his life wanted nothing to do with
such wrong ideas. But at this point he fell ill and died. Some of his
followers confessed, repented, and found the way again, but others
remained in rebellion.
***************

Prince Rakoczi and his army surround Sabatisch
On July 23, 1645, Prince Rákóczi and his whole army marched over
the mountains and encamped in the fields near Karlath.
We were once again in great fear and danger, for our community at
Sabatisch was surrounded by soldiers. From all sides they tried to force
their way over fences and stone walls.
Through God's manifold grace this was prevented, but it cost us much
bread, wine, and beer.
In August Prince Rákóczi again struck camp and went to Senitz with
his forces. At Sabatisch, Bakos Gabor remained in the fields overnight. We
supplied both of them with food and drink in their tents, as we had often
done, so they left us in peace; and apart from our terrible fear, we suffered
no violence. They then returned home over the mountains.
Since he became ruler, Prince Rákóczi had often asked us to begin a
community of brothers at Bodock on his estate. The elders had tried hard
in various ways to resist, but this time it was unavoidable. The prince told
them if they came voluntarily, well and good, but if not, he now had the
means to make them. To prevent a dispersal of the community, it was

agreed that the whole household from Tschäskowitz should move to
Bodock. The prince's servants came with sufficient wagons and escorts for
them. So on August 25 they loaded the wagons and set out in God's name,
in tears and great distress, with the plea that the almighty God faithfully
support them and help them to build up a proper community there.
They did not prosper, however, but had to eke out a meager existence
as famine years soon followed in 1650, 1651, and 1652. A bushel and a
half of grain cost eight or nine gulden. The church community outside
Transylvania and at Alwinz had to support them to such an extent that all
were impoverished along with the community at Bodock.
After a few years most of them died of the plague. The few who
remained moved either to Velké Leváre or to Alwinz in Transylvania.
During 1645 the plague took a high toll in towns and villages far and
wide. In November and December it began among us at Sabatisch. Here
and in other communities many fine, capable, and good people died.
So the year 1645 ended in great misery and fear, and any people and
animals perished. What was not stolen was lost in other ways. Once again
the church was in great poverty, having little harvest from garden and
field. It is impossible to describe everything. This is just a short account of
the distress of these times, recorded here for the sake of our descendants.
May God the Almighty grant us a better future. *
***************

1647 Fifteen-pound hailstones fell near Tobitschau
In July 1647 there was a devastating hailstorm in Moravia around
Tobitschau. Fifteen-pound hailstones fell, and not only birds and hares but
deer and wolves were killed.
In that year a heavy tax was imposed in Hungary, and the church had
to pay more than seven hundred gulden.

***************

1650 Expelled again from Moravia
In November 1650 our brothers who were working for lords in
Moravia were once again expelled from the country by the provincial diet
at Brünn.,
***************

1652 Comet
From December 10 until December 16, 1652, a comet with a scarcely
visible tail was seen rising in the southeast, continuing its course westward
and toward the north. God alone knows its meaning.
***************

1654 Daniel Zwicker a doctor from Prussia joined the church
community
On May 31, 1654, a medical doctor named Daniel Zwicker came to
Sabatisch with three other men from Danzig in Prussia. There had already
been considerable correspondence with Zwicker about points of faith.
These four men traveled around the communities for ten days, asking
many questions about every aspect of our life. Daniel Zwicker read the
church's confession and the five articles of our faith. He saw that all was
truly Christian, accepted, believed, and confessed it. He was then taken
into the church by the elders with the laying on of hands and became our
brother. Since he was a learned and zealous man, the service of the Gospel
was laid on him, and he was confirmed in it. He was to go to Prussia and

Poland and wherever the Lord would show him an opportunity to visit the
zealous, gather people for the Lord, and be fully used in this service as a
faithful worker for men's salvation.
In October of this year 1654, we received word that it might be
possible to start a community in the Palatinate, whereas in Hungary in
many places we were not allowed to accept more people. Two brothers
were sent to the count palatine in Heidelberg, and he received us in a
friendly way. Following this, we took over a place in the city of Mannheim
and began to build, asking that God the Lord bless the work and make it
fruitful to his praise.
***************

1655 Deaths from Pestilence
During the month of September 1655 a terrible epidemic swept
through the land, causing many deaths. At Velké Leváre about two hundred
and seventy of our people died a pitiful death.
***************

1661 Comet/German Soldiers enter Hungary
In the year 1661, a comet with a dim, pointed tail above it was
visible from January 23 to February 10, moving ahead of the morning star.
It was seen every day at Sabatisch from four o'clock in the morning until
daylight.
On May 6, sixteen thousand German soldiers from the imperial army
advanced over the Little Carpathians into Hungary. They cost the church
large amounts of bread, wine, beer, salt, oats, and gifts for the guards.

On May 29, two regiments of dragoons crossed the Little
Carpathians, following the previous troops. Once again, the church
suffered.
On June 7, yet another army of several thousand German imperial
soldiers marched over the Little Carpathians into Hungary, again costing
the church huge quantities of beer, wine, bread, oats, and cooked food. In
addition there was the expense of the special food consumed by the
officers who moved into our community. These three contingents cost our
community at Sabatisch seventy-eight gulden in ready money for the
guard alone; the contribution of knives amounted to seventy gulden more,
not counting pottery and other articles. So this year 1661 ended in fear,
anxiety, and grief. The brotherhood was oft beset by cares and terrors, yet
God the Almighty stood by us and protected us. To him alone be all honor
and glory.
***************

1662 Crops ruined by sudden cold spell in May
On May 16, 1662, a cold spell set in with strong winds, snow, and
frost. This lasted until May 23. Although the grapes, fruit, and berries had
looked very promising and the grain in the fields was mostly in flower and
as fine as one could wish, in many places everything was frozen and
ruined. So the cold was followed by a time of scarcity. The church
community was badly affected, for at Velké Leváre, Protzka, and St.
Johannes they had nothing but empty straw to harvest.
***************

1662 Andreas Ehrenpreis last words & parting/Johannes
Rücker Elder

On August 1, 1662, in Sabatisch at a quarter past nine in the
morning, our dear, faithful brother Andreas Ehrenpreis fell asleep in the
Lord with a peaceful heart and clear conscience. He was a loyal, devout,
and zealous servant of the Gospel and Elder of the whole church of God.
On July 28, four days before his death, he spoke the following words
to the elders who had come to visit him on his sickbed:
Dear brothers, the time has come when I feel and hope that the Lord
will soon release me, for I am very weak.
First of all, I want to declare to you that to the best of my knowledge
I stand before God the Lord with nothing burdening my soul, in spite of
the weaknesses which I, like everyone else, must accuse myself of. From
the moment I surrendered myself to God, I wanted at all times and in
every matter to serve wholeheartedly, especially when I was a servant of
the Gospel and when I was entrusted with the burden of caring for the
whole church. In matters that came up for judgment, I have tried to deal
justly with everyone. I know of nothing between myself and anyone else
that I am not at peace about or that was not cleared up with the
brotherhood. If it was sometimes necessary to speak sharply to this one or
that, I did it for his good so that each would be mindful of his or her
calling.
With regard to you, my fellow ministers, who have assisted me in the
service of the Word and often taken counsel with me about the
community's needs, I ask your forgiveness for any time I have hurt you.
Please do not hold it against me if I spoke too curtly or with irritation,
which could very easily have happened. I am well content with each one of
you, without exception, and I thank you for the obedience and loyal
support you have shown in serving with me.
Above all, my beloved brothers, I beg you to be faithful in your care
of the church. Watch over her and neglect nothing, keeping steadfastly to
her teachings. You can see that corruption is spreading in the community.
Do not let the way be lost completely and the old boundary stones moved!

See to it that the good ordinances of old are always observed, so that
the church is firmly grounded and sustained in peace, for it has been
sealed by the blood of many martyrs, and beyond a doubt the foundation is
well laid. If we follow the path taken by our devout forefathers, none of us
will come to shame.
I beg you, dear brothers who carry the service of the Gospel and are
appointed as shepherds and teachers for others, beware of quarrels and
division and let no disunity arise among you, which could lead to rebellion
among the people, causing strife and separation. As soon as you notice any
sign of a disturbance, try to overcome it before it gains ground.
I greatly fear that there will be a serious split in the community. Keep
careful watch over the young and inexperienced so that they do not rush
headlong to their own ruin. Seek to root out what is evil in them and
implant what is good.
Look after the sick and old, widows and orphans, and all the afflicted.
Again and again, it has been painfully evident how the enemy and
tempter of the human race concentrates all his powers on sowing noxious
weeds throughout the Lord's church. Therefore, be on your guard and turn
to God continually in prayer, for if ever there was a time when prayer was
needed, it is now, especially when we see how powerfully evil has
increased in these last perilous days.
Diligent prayer often moves the Lord to send his help and show us
mercy, so it is essential not to slacken in prayer when wickedness is
gaining the upper hand, not only outside our communities but inside as
well.
Now with the hands of my heart I take leave of you all and entrust
you to the mighty hand of God. May he help you to be true fighters until
you attain a blessed end.
I ask you to say farewell on my behalf to everyone in the church,
including those who are on lonely outposts, serving on manorial estates,

for they serve in the fear of God out of obedience to the church and, as far
as it is fitting, to the authorities. May the Lord in heaven reward them!
Accept my sincere thanks for all the kindness and loyalty shown me
by everyone. Lastly, greet all the dear brothers and sisters a thousand times
with the peace of Jesus Christ. May he in his mercy take you all into his
gracious protection.
I do not need to suggest anyone to take my place in the leadership
when I am gone. Choose the one God shows you. It is much more
profitable and reassuring for you to choose by making a unanimous
witness. The Lord will surely respond to your fervent prayers and provide
you with another faithful shepherd. This I wish you from God the
Almighty through Jesus Christ, Amen.
Then the brothers who had gathered around him in his last illness
responded to his words and testified that he had done his utmost to lead
the church in the fear of God as long as it had been entrusted to him. May
the Lord in heaven reward him on the last day.
With tears in their eyes, the brothers expressed their deep gratitude
and blessed him with the peace of Christ. Then dear brother Andreas spoke
once more: If we do not see each other again on this earth, may the Lord
grant that we may see each other in the kingdom of grace. Amen.
Thus, as has been recorded, he fell peacefully asleep in the Lord on
August 1. Only two hours earlier he had called together all the elders and
servants of the Word who had come to be with him. He declared that he
stood before God with a good conscience and was at peace with all
brothers and sisters, and he commended the church to their care. His mind
remained clear until the end.
He was seventy-three years old and had faithfully carried out the
service of the Gospel for forty-one years. He had led the church with great
dedication as a true shepherd and Elder for twenty-three years, giving
teaching, admonition, and discipline.

Since God the Almighty, according to his loving will, had released
dear brother Andreas from this vale of tears, and the church could not be
left long without a shepherd, the elders and servants for temporal needs,
stewards, storekeepers, work distributors, and many other trusted brothers
gathered as soon as possible at Sabatisch. In the fear of God the Almighty,
they prayed that he would show us another devout and faithful shepherd.
By unanimous testimony this office of leading and serving the church as a
faithful shepherd was entrusted to dear brother Johannes Rocker on August
8.
***************

1663 Signs that preceded the war with the Turks & Tartars
In 1663, these lands of Moravia, Austria, and Hungary were visited
by God with a terrible war, beyond doubt due to the sins of the Christians.
For the Turks, the perennial foe of those known as Christians, mustered to
overthrow Christendom.
The church of the Lord, with all people in the country, was; harshly
struck by this rod of God's wrath, as the reader can see; with grief and
horror from the following accounts.
The just and righteous God let signs and wonders appear in the
heavens foretelling the punishment to come, for already on August 14,
1662, there was a terrible hailstorm at 1663 Auspitz in Moravia that killed
many deer, sheep, hares, and other animals.
In the same year 1662, on November 10 at three in the morning, a
blood-red sword was seen in the sky by many people A blood-red sword
was seen in the sky by many people in Sabatisch and the surrounding
villages. Its point was toward the west and its hilt toward the east.
On May 18, 1663, in the early morning, before sunrise, the semblance
of a pillar was seen in the sky. It stood above the sun and was of three
colors - red, green, and yellow.

On June 8, a ring of many colors was seen around the sun from twelve
o'clock until after three. Around the periphery of the sun, inside the ring,
there appeared to be a dark cloud as if threatening rain. Many people
wondered at the sight and took it for a special sign, as it was visible
around the sun right in the middle of the day. It was more frightening than
anything within living memory. These were all signs of future disaster, as
was the comet described above for the previous year.
***************

1663 The terrible war with the Turks & Tartars
In May of the same year, 1663, work on the fortification of Vienna
was continued. Many beautiful gardens and pavilions were torn down. A
space had to be cleared to the distance of a musket shot from the city
walls, so everything was demolished. It was announced that all inhabitants
of the city must stock enough provisions for a year. Anyone unable to do
so must leave the city and move elsewhere. The citizens were ordered to
raise a huge sum of money, up to 100,000 gulden, and to provide food and
lodging for a garrison of 60,000 men in the city, which would mean
bringing in something like 60,000 bushels of rye and oats.
On July 7, all lords, nobles, and landowners were called up and
required to supply one foot soldier for every twenty men to fight against
the Turks. The recruits marched to Neutra for the mustering and were a
considerable burden on the church community. May God have mercy on
devout Christians and on all oppressed souls.
In August 1663, when the imperial troops were moving back and
forth around Schinda, our people from Farkeschin took flight, some
making for Tyrnau and others for Bibersburg Castle. As they had to
evacuate their community completely, the oxen, cows, and sheep were
taken to Kesselsdorf in an attempt to save them. Here they stayed until the
enemy attacked Kesselsdorf and made off with the Farkeschin animals as
well as all the others.

Farkeschin had been plundered many times, but now the houses were
burned to the ground. Hardly any of our people from there survived; they
were lost in the unending warfare. Most of them died on the continual
flights. So we lost our community at Farkeschin. Everything was gone people and goods and chattels.
On August 7, the Hungarians attacked the Turkish camp near Parkan,
but suffered a devastating defeat. The loss was estimated at four thousand
men.
When the Turks had cleared Count Fargasch and his men from their
path and buried most of them on the battlefield at Parkan, the way lay
open for them to attack the fortress at Neuhäusel, which they had wanted
to do for a long time. They advanced with their whole army, estimated at
70,000 men or more (including 10,000 Tartars, 6,000 Wallachians, and
4,000 Moldavians), bringing 130 pieces of artillery with them.
On August 17, Neuhäusel was in plain sight of the whole Turkish
army. They laid siege to it and started a heavy attack on the fortress,
drawing up a battery and bombarding the walls, with cannon fire.
The Tartars waged an even fiercer battle throughout the Neuhäusel
district and the neighboring area, burning to the ground every hamlet and
village as far as the Waag River. They killed every living thing they met
except the women, whom; they kept as slaves. All this took place in their
first onslaught.
And since the Turks had razed everything to the ground for miles
around Neuhausel and had left very little for themselves to live on, they
looked for an easy route to cross the Waag and March rivers into Moravia.
On September 2, the enemy attacked Freistadt with robbery, slaughter, and
burning.
After the brutal Tartar hordes had encamped to recover somewhat
from their strenuous expedition, hunger drove these murderers to start out
again for the Waag and see how the Moravian pastures would suit their
stomachs.

On September 3, when they found a traitor who offered to show them
a shallow place where their horses could swim across, they swarmed
across the ford at once.
The fear, misery, desperate flight, and death caused by this Tartar
invasion in Hungary, Austria, and especially in Moravia, defy description.
All one could see from a distance was fire.
The whole country was covered with blood and ashes by these
murderous evildoers. They killed the men, whether old or young; they
dashed helpless children against the walls; they raped the women, high and low-born alike, and took great numbers of them naked into captivity,
thrown across their horses' backs. After roaming far and wide across the
land they met with resistance, but by taking another direction they
managed to carry many thousands of Christians out of those countries into
the wretchedness of slavery.
This terrible wave of fear, misery, and death also struck the church of
the Lord. Our farms and houses on the other side of the mountains were
attacked and pillaged without warning.
On September 3, the Turks and Tartars quite unexpectedly invaded
the country on this side of the Waag and swept down on Dechtitz after ten
in the morning. Thirty-five people from our community there, men and
women, boys and girls, were taken into captivity in foreign lands, among
them brother Christel Lerch, a servant of the Word, and his wife Catharina.
Then the enemy set the buildings on fire, and all household supplies,
tools, and everything stored inside were burned. They drove off 25 head of
cattle, 250 sheep, 40 hogs, and 6 horses.
Exactly the same happened on that same day at our community in
Kesselsdorf. Between ten and eleven in the morning our people were
attacked quite unexpectedly by the Turks and Tartars.
The head wheelwright and a sister were killed, and 44 of our people
were carried off as captives. The livestock was stolen and the buildings
were burned.

The remaining people took refuge at Bibersburg Castle for a year and
several weeks, but it was a miserable existence.
On that day, the enemy also raided our community of Tschäskowitz.
As our people had already fled to the castle, no one fell into the enemies'
hands except a schoolboy who was late because he was fetching water
from the well; he was taken captive to a foreign land. May God have
mercy on him.
All the livestock was taken and the whole place was set' on fire.
Early in the morning of September 4, the enemy raided our
community at Sabatisch, and seventeen of our people fell into their hands.
Some were murdered, some were carried off and some lost their lives in
other ways in the sudden tumult.
The next day the buildings were put to the torch and burned with
everything in them - a loss of many thousand gulden.
That same September 4, the enemy pillaged our community at
Protzka. Seven people fell into their hands and were carried off to foreign
lands.
On September 6, when the Turks and Tartars were returning from
Auspitz in Moravia with an enormous amount of booty, they first looted
our community at Protzka and then set it on fire and burned it to the
ground. All the cattle and sheep were seized and driven off, totaling 14
oxen, 80 head of cattle, and 350 sheep.
Meanwhile, the enemy had reached our place at St. Johannes. They
looted wherever they wanted and took everything they found. Four of our
people were caught and taken away as captives.
On October 5, the Turks and Tartars attacked our community at
Soblahof, sacking it and burning it to the ground. All the cows, sheep, and
horses were taken. Twelve of our people were ruthlessly murdered or taken
captive.

In all, 122 people from the church were taken in bondage to foreign
countries or were murdered by the enemy, the Turks and Tartars. Only
three of this number were released. The Lord be praised for these!
In their first surprise attack on Moravia, the Turks had crossed the
Waag and March rivers and raided Nikolsburg, Rabensburg, Göding,
Brünn, Ungarisch Ostra, Holleschau, and other places, to within three
miles of Olmütz. The whole country was burned bare; everyone over forty
was strangled. Many young women were carried off, one on each soldier's
horse; little children were put in ragged sacks and slung behind the saddles
like baggage.
In this way, 12,000 people either lost their lives or their freedom,
which amounts to the same. Woods and mountains were scoured, and the
poor people hiding there found little safety from the enemy, who used
traitors as guides and interpreters to speak German, Bohemian, Hungarian,
or Slovakian and so deceive and mislead those in hiding. The passes were
no difficulty to the invaders. The abovementioned traitors showed them
every crack and cranny, every bridge and byway. If any Tartars were
captured, they could not be made to say a single word - they acted as if
dumb and would rather be killed than give information. Very rarely did
they let themselves be caught, preferring to plunge under water and drown.
Most of them carried flint and steel and all kinds of material for
starting fires so that they could rapidly set hamlets and villages ablaze.
They drove their prisoners off like a herd of cattle. No one was brave
enough to rescue the poor, groaning Christian prisoners, though it could
easily have been done with a few thousand cavalry. There were only about
four thousand of the brutal, naked marauders, and these were very poorly
armed. Not one in a hundred had a pistol; in fact, only here and there one
of them had a rusty little saber, a spear, or perhaps an arrow. How easily
they might have been routed can be seen by the fact that near Drosing,
twenty well-armed peasants repulsed five hundred of them, killing eighty
of their number.
When winter was at the door, the Turks planned to finish off by
getting spoils from the Christians for the way home. So they swam the

Waag River once more, raided all the way into Silesia, captured several
thousand people, and brought them to their camp. Some assert that in three
raids, quite apart from those murdered, they swept more than 40,000
Christians into perpetual bondage.
After this, the imperial forces entered the country. They often camped
at our remaining communities and cost us over one hundred gulden.
So the year 1663 drew to an end with misery, terror, and death on all
sides, with much heartache, groaning, and weeping. The land was laid
waste, and men and cattle perished. Anything that had not been stolen was
lost in other ways.
The whole church community was again brought into utter poverty
and ruin, for we could harvest hardly any field or garden crops.
What happened at that time was so dreadful, inhuman and unchristian
that it defies description. This is only a brief report, included here for the
sake of our descendants. May God the Almighty grant a better future.
***************

1664 Raider stole what little the Turks had left behind
During 1664, the church community of the Lord suffered no further
damage from the Turks and Tartars. At the same time, it was hard pressed
by the imperial forces. Anything the Turks had left us was now stolen by
thievish raiders.
A particularly bad instance was in October when a large number of
soldiers and their colonel came and camped for several days at Velké
Leváre. We had to provide them with plenty of oats, hay, and new wine,
and it cost the church over three hundred gulden.
***************

1665 Brothers sent to the Mennonites for alms/Another
comet
On January 4, 1665, at six in the evening another comet appeared. It
had a pointed tail and turned toward the east. It was visible for two weeks.
Only God knows the meaning of this. On March 26 at two o'clock in the
afternoon, a fire broke out in our community smithy at Sabatisch as a
result of carelessness. Not only the smithy burned down, but also the
sicklesmiths' and wheelwrights' shops, the saddlers' and wheelwrights'
huts, as well as a few little sheds. The floors, however, were saved. None
of the peasants' houses were burned down. (Sabatisch burned down four
times in thirty years.)
At three in the morning of April 5, another comet with a long tail was
seen a number of times.
After the great fear and poverty we had endured during the oftreported, sudden, and terrible war with the Turks and Tartars, misery and
ruin had fallen on the whole church of the Lord, as well as on many
thousands of other people in the land, high- and low-born alike. On April
7, we met at Sabatisch in our great poverty, as we had done several times
before, to take counsel on how to feed and care for our poor widows and
orphans, many of whom had been brought there from the other
communities during this difficult time. We unanimously agreed to appeal
for help to the (Mennonite) churches in the Netherlands.
We counseled together before the Lord and in reverent fear of God
decided that the two brothers, Christoph Baumhauer and Benjamin Poley,
both servants of the Word of God, should be sent from Sabatisch on April
21 on this mission for the Lord's work. In great fear of God and under
divine protection, they went to Mannheim in the Palatinate and from there
to Amsterdam. They traveled in Holland, Zeeland, Flanders, and Friesland.
By word of mouth and in a letter from all the elders of our church, we
asked the congregations in the Netherlands for help and support, telling
them how we had come into extreme poverty and misery and were driven

by our need to seek their help. God the Lord moved their hearts to help his
church and send a good contribution to support us. Glory, honor, and praise
be to God the Almighty to all eternity. Amen.
The last pages of our church history book contain in full the letter
which was written by the elders and sent with the two brothers to the
congregations in Holland. It is too long to include here. On October 28 the
two brothers, Christoph Baumhauer and Benjamin Poley, returned home
safely from their long journey to Holland and other places. They arrived in
peace and under God's protection, having completed their task. God be
praised for bringing them safely there and back.
During the two years of 1664 and 1665, all grain prices were very
high. A bushel and a half of wheat, Senitz measure, cost three gulden and
more; the same amount of rye cost two gulden and fifty kreuzer; of barley,
two gulden; of oats, sixty kreuzer; and of peas, over three gulden. The
price of a pair of raw oxhides was ten gulden.
***************

1665 Letter of thanks to the Mennonites
A circular letter of thanks for this financial help from the Dutch
Mennonites was sent by Johannes Rücker and his helpers on November 24,
1665. Preserved at the Mennonite Archives in Amsterdam (cat. no. 2851);
it is translated here in part:
Most beloved, worthy, and dedicated Tobias Gooverts van den
Wyngaert, chosen by God as friend and brother in the Lord.
On October 27 our beloved and merciful God brought back to us our
dear brothers Christof Baumhauer and Benjamin Poley, true servants and
fellow-workers in God's Word, whom we had sent to you and your
Christian church. We have thanked God many times from our hearts that
he has helped them continually in this dangerous time to come back again
in happiness, joy, peace, and in good health to us and their dear wives and

children. They found them, although in great poverty, at least under a roof,
which was not so when they left. The Lord be honored and praised always.
We ask our almighty God from our hearts that our great poverty and
misery may be turned into the riches of the future; this we must always
plead for earnestly. Further the two brothers tell us what love and
kindness, yes, what Christian brotherly compassion they received on all
sides from our friends, especially from elders, teachers, and deacons.
Yes, we have truly felt with the entire Church such mutual Christian
love, faith, and compassion, even before the brothers returned, that we
cannot thank enough the most high God in the name of Jesus Christ that he
turned our friends' hearts towards us in our need. Yes, in spite of their
heavy burdens, they have humbly carried our misery as if it were their own
in these difficult, troubled times.
They have also tried to ease our physical suffering. May the almighty
God give his grace and blessing to comfort the devout and refresh them in
body and soul, and to build up our worthy, kind, and charitable friends and
help their growth before the Lord in the new, heavenly Jerusalem. We who
have received the great love and kindness that our beloved friends have
shown us can never equal such generosity. We were at a loss and helpless
and would never have been able to survive if God had not considered us in
his great love and mercy and inclined our dear friend toward us and come
to our aid.
We thank and praise God thousands of times and want to remember
such kindness all the days of our life. We should not forget the love we
received, and if possible in one way or another repay our dear friends and
their families as our brothers and sisters in the faith. After all we owe it in
Christian brotherliness which we confess from our hearts. May our loving,
faithful, and bounteous God and Father, the Father of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, yes, a Father of widows and orphans, grant to our dear friends
and their whole church that the good they did for us, this sacrifice, may
bring them a rich reward here in this time and afterwards in eternity. This
we wish them.
May our merciful, faithful God and Father, the source of all good,
incline our hearts towards each other so that we are linked through the

bond of the Holy Spirit and joined to be one body and one spirit, with one
faith, one God and Father, one Head and master who is Jesus Christ.
Our kind and merciful God and Father [will have us] as his weak
shoots and plants and pull out of the soil of our hearts every weed, so that
our fruitful earthly kingdom is restored and made fitting to his own and
his son's praise and honor ... [next sentences incomplete.]
Now there is much hardship, as many waves of evil, torment, and
adversity try to overturn Peter's small boat - ills come upon the life to
destroy its fruit. On this account we must always pray diligently and
zealously: Lord deliver us from temptation. If we have understood rightly
from our brothers, our friends have not lacked in zeal for this, but have
always done so in their meetings .... [gaps]
[We would wish], if possible, to serve one another with counsel,
teaching, and help, for our numbers are small and there are few who want
to go the narrow way of the cross with us in these end times. Let
everything, however, be entrusted to the Lord, who knows best how to do
it and to reward each one according to his work. We thank our dear friends
many thousand times for the donations collected for us. [page torn]
I, Johannes Rücker, and my fellow elders and brothers in the Gospel
on behalf of the whole Church in Lower Hungary greet you warmly many
thousand times with the true token of the Prince of peace, Jesus Christ, and
with the kiss of brotherly love, that He may remain with us, here in this
time and later in eternity.
Written in Lower Hungary at Sabatisch. Nov. 24, 1665.
We have also heard from the brothers that our friends intercede for us
because they have heard of our great misery. So we ask you all, as friends,
to call on our loving, almighty God for us and the poor prisoners, as we
hear nothing definite about them. May He shield us from such evil and
come to the help of the poor, bereft people. We shall also pray for them in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We ask our friends in brotherliness to be so kind and send this letter
soon to our friends and brothers in the faith, to reduce the cost of mailing.
Your most humble servants in the Word of our Lord:
Johannes Rücker
Caspar Eglauch
Jakob Kettenacker
Hans Blessinger
Tobias Bersch
Johannes Hilscher
***************

1621 Account of the church at Alwinz
Now we must give a short account of the history and state of the
church community at Alwinz as far as I have learned of them from written
and oral reports.
The account for 1621 tells how Prince Bethlen Gabor took our
brothers and sisters by force from Hungary to Transylvania. In the
following year, 1622, another 695 of our people fled there to escape the
persecution in Moravia. At the beginning, they had to struggle to make a
livelihood, but after troubled and stormy years God gave them a quiet,
peaceful time in which the community could become well established. He
blessed them in material ways as well. Various workshops were set up,
including some for trades not practiced in the country before. For this
reason the church community was well protected and given complete
freedom of religion by the prince.

He favored the community because he greatly -appreciated their
honesty, dependability, and devoutness, and they had to provide people to
work for him. Wherever he had a mill, someone from the community was
given responsibility. Consequently the brothers prospered materially, and
God blessed the growth and building up of the church. It is said that there
were five hundred couples in the community. The whole place was well
built and surrounded by a stone wall.
Nothing is known about their spiritual state; we have no written
records. But since the brotherhood at Alwinz was under the care and
direction of the Elder at Sabatisch with whose advice everything was done,
it was probably no different than that of the church in Hungary. When an
Elder died, another was appointed in his place. Whenever serious
problems arose, some brothers were sent from Sabatisch to help resolve
them. In 1629, for instance, brother Valentin Winter sent two servants of
the Word, Andreas Ehrenpreis and Hans Jakob Hegeler, also Hans
Benckert, to Alwinz in Transylvania to admonish and encourage the
brotherhood.
In 1633, brother Kunz Porth and Jakob Mathroner were sent to
Transylvania to deal with the difficulties that Isaak Baumann had caused
the church at Alwinz.
In 1642, brother Andreas Ehrenpreis sent a pastoral letter to Alwinz,
which in a brotherly way pointed out their faults and failings, pleaded with
them, and encouraged them with many kind words to strengthen their
inner life.
In 1649, Andreas Ehrenpreis sent another pastoral letter to the church
community at Alwinz and Bodock. Both letters are to be found in our
church history book and are too long to be included here.
During 1646, plague was raging in Transylvania. In many towns and
villages a large part of the inhabitants had died. The sickness attacked the
church-community as well, and many lost their lives. People say that one
did not ask, Who has died? but How many?

In 1658, the principality of Transylvania was overrun by Turks and
Tartars. With their pillaging, burning, and massacring, they did terrible
damage. They took thousands of lives, led off countless numbers of people
and animals, and devastated the land. Alwinz, too, was set on fire and our
community' almost completely burned down. Just before the attack, the
brothers had brought in their grain crops and hastily threshed and stored
about 150 bushels. The rest went up in flames along with the hay and
straw. Our people fled to the castle. Eternal praise and thanks to God the
Lord, who so graciously protected and saved them. He kept them together
so that not one was taken prisoner and led away by these evil people.
Besides this fear and misery that weighed on them, our people had to
pay 115 gulden in taxes.
During the year 1659, Prince Ráköczi [Georg Ráköczi II] made war
on his enemies in Hungary as well as on the Turks and Tartars who
invaded Transylvania. With the help of the Turks, Barcagoss was trying to
seize the principality from Prince Ráköczi by force, and the country was in
extreme danger. Barcagoss was defeated, but he escaped into Turkey and
returned with several thousand Turks, set himself up in Hermannstadt, and
defended himself with their help. Thereupon Prince Ráköczi came with a
large army and laid siege to the city from Christmas time right into the
spring. But then the Turks arrived with such a great force that he had to
raise the siege.
Meanwhile, the community at Alwinz was again attacked by
Hungarian soldiers and robbed and plundered. Ten horses were taken and
the grain and hay used up as fodder. Although several brothers remained at
the place, not one of them was harmed; the others had all fled to the castle.
The brothers had to pay five hundred imperial talers in taxes.
***************

1660 Account of the church in Alwinz

In June 1660, Prince Ráköczi attacked the Turks in the decisive
battle of Klausenburg. He fought valiantly and with knightly heroism for
the fatherland, striking down a number of Turks with his own hand, but in
the end he lost his life.
In July 1661, a Turkish pasha led a large army into Transylvania, and
they camped on the brothers' fields at Alwinz, not far from our houses. But
with the help of God, our people fled to the fortress, taking most of their
belongings with them. Some of our brothers were still in the yard with
three wagons when the enemy arrived, but God the Almighty made it
possible for them to get the three laden wagons onto the bridge, and in this
way they blocked the enemies' pursuit. While the Turks unharnessed the
animals and pushed the loaded wagons into the Maros River, our brothers
made their escape.
Meanwhile our community, which had only just been rebuilt, was set
on fire in several places; not only house, stable, and barn were burned, but
also the grain. Nearly all the grain had been cut, and a good part (about
four hundred shocks) carried from the fields across the river toward the
fortress. The brothers did not want to risk bringing it to our place and
hoped it would be safe there; but it was all burned and ruined, not only in
the fields but everywhere. Not even a handful of grain was left.
During this raid, one brother was killed. Two others were taken
prisoner, but one regained his freedom and returned to the church
community. So through God's help, not more than one soul was carried off.
Praise be to God in all eternity that in spite of everything, he gave us such
protection. Our people had to remain in the fortress, however, patiently
enduring their distress and poverty. The miserable conditions led to an
epidemic and the best of our craftsmen died. In all, we lost 150 people
during this time.
In October of this year 1661, the Turkish forces withdrew and
returned home, causing tremendous damage wherever they passed. They
discovered such animals as we still had - cows and sheep - and stole them
even from quite near the fortress. So our people lost all their livestock and
were left with nothing. That autumn they could neither plant nor sow but
had to remain in the fortress. We may well grieve over such misery, but

nonetheless we should thank God for keeping our people together; no one
was taken away.
In August 1662, things were quiet in Transylvania as far as the Turks
were concerned, so our people at Alwinz had some respite. On August 21,
they left the fortress and returned to their homes, where they lived in huts
that they put up between the burned-out walls. The Turkish pasha gave
them a letter safeguarding them from marauding Turks. God in his mercy
provided help throughout this time. To him alone be praise. Amen.
No written account of subsequent happenings at Alwinz has been
discovered. The record in the following pages is all based on oral reports.
***************

Servants of the Word who led the Church at Alwinz,
Servants of the Word who led the Church at Alwinz
These can be found in our first history book up to 1665.
Franz Walther 1621
Albrecht Seil 1623
Joseph Nägele 1625
Albrecht Grob 1623
Hans Jakob Hegeler 1637
Isaak Bauman 1634
Valtin Fischer 1650
Georg Geer 1651

Esaias Way 1668
Felix Striby 1649
Joseph Stamler 1667
Jakob Weiss 1677
Jakob Litzebucher 1647,
***************

To the Reader
With God's help I have gone over the whole account as recorded in
our first church history book to the year 1665. For brevity's sake I have
omitted many fine and profitable passages because some may be read in
other books and also do not belong to the actual history of the church.
These include the answers and confessions of faith given to secular and
clerical authorities by the martyrs and other valiant fighters for Christ, and
many wonderful pastoral letters by beloved brothers, especially by Jakob
Hutter, Peter Ridemann, and Peter Walpot.
Similarly, I have omitted the list of brothers elected to the service of
the Word and of temporal affairs, with the dates of their confirmation in
the ministry and their deaths. I have included the election and death of
only those who were leaders and Elders of the whole church. But since the
register of servants of the Word is given twice in the first history book of
our church, I will add one here to let people know how many servants of
the Word served the church during these 135 years.
***************

List of servants of the Word

Who have passed away, some by Martyrdom, since Jakob Hutter's
time
Jakob Hutter 1536 martyred
Onophrius Griesinger. 1538 martyred
Leonhard Lochmaier... 1538 martyred
Georg Fasser 1539 martyred
Ulrich Stadler 1540
Hans Amon 1542
Hans Gentner 1548
Wolf Sailer 1551
Peter Haag 1551
Hans Plattner 1552
Kaspar Schmid 1552
Matthias Legeder 1552
Simon Waindel 1553
Hans Spindler 1553
Michel Matschidl 1553
Jakob Seckler 1553
Peter Ridemann 1556
Paul Schuster 1559
Lorenz Hueff 156o

Hans Schmidt 1558 martyred
Klaus Felbinger 1560 martyred
Jakob Kircher 1561
Abraham Schneider 1560
Hänsl Mändel 1561 martyred
Hans Feuerbacher 1562
Hans Greckhofer 1562
Sigmund Hassauer 1564
Leonhard Lanzenstil 1565
Franciskus Walsch 1565 martyred
Burkhard Bamerle 1567
Ambrosius Pfeiffer 1568
Conrad Haintzeman 1568
Hans Zwinger 1568
Toman Epensteiner 1570
Hans Schlagindiepfann 1570
Bärtel Ridemair 1571
Christoff Lenck 1571
Bärtel Ringl 1572
Caspar Braitmichl 1573

Caspar Hueber 1573
Leonhard Dax 1574
Hans Arbeiter 1575
Caspar Ebner 1575
Ulrich Plattner 1577
Andreas Beck 1577
Peter Walpot 1578
Caspar Behem 1578
Melchior Waal 1578
Peter Horich 1580
Hänsl Zillerstaler 1580
Thomas Schuster 1580
Hans Landtman 1580
Christian Dietel 1580
Joseph Doppelhammer 1580
Heinrich Summer 1582 martyred
Andreas Mairhofer 1583
Hans Kräl 1583
Stoffel Garber 1584
Andreas Walsch 1584

Paul Glock 1585
Balthasar Mairhofer 1586
Veit Uhrmacher 1586
Georg Uhrmacher 1586
Hans Schlegel 1587
Hans Baldauf 1587
Wendel Holba 1587
Michel Veldthaler 1587
Nikoläsch Holba 1588
Valtin Hörl 1589
Blasi Etztaler 1590
Walser Hasenfelder 1590
Paul Ilzmüller 1591
Leonhard Reiss 1591
Wenesch Keller 1593
Thoman Häring 1593
Abel Ockershauser 1593
Matthias Binder 1593
Jakob Hinnen 1594
Haeuss Porst 1595

Andrea Lehner 1595
Franz Moritz 1596
Georg Rader 1597
Gilg Federspil 1597
David Hassel 1599
Wolf Hungermiller 1599
Christan Gschwenter 1600
Peter Tryer 1600
Hans Neumär 1600
Andrea Kleesatl 1601
Hans Schmid 1602
Bastl Anfang 1603
Stoffel Rath 1603
Lamprecht Jänko 1605
Caspar Uhle 1605
Johannes Rath 1606
Georg Acker 1606
Hans Langenbach 1607
Rupp Gölner 1608
Gilg Mold 1609

Klaus Braidl 1611
Stoffel Kienhueber 1611
Ludwig Dörker 1611
Adam Neiffer 1613
Georg Weller 1613
Sigmund Bühler 1613
Conrad Glasser 1614
Hansel Metzger 1614
Daniel Helrigl 1615
Stoffel Schenck 1615
Darius Hein 1618
Joseph Hauser 1616
Martin Gottsman 1618
Sebastian Dietrich 1619
Georg Bieberstein 1620
Hans Jakob Wolf 1620
Leonhard Schmid 1621
Augustin Graf 1621
Stoffel Rüecker 1621
Hans Staindl 1621

Ulrich Jaussling 1621
Niklas Küenzi 1621
David Stainer 1621
Conrad Blösy 1621
Franz Walther 1621
Michel Kocher 1622
Albrecht Seil 1623
Albrecht Grob 1623
Hansl Sumer 1625
Joseph Nägele 1625
Uhl Müller 1627
Jakob Bösler 1627
Seifrid Geiss 1627
Hauptrecht Zapff 1630
Valentin Winter 1631
Abraham Scheffer 1639
Joseph Wirz 1632
Lorenz Putz 1632
Hansel Hartmeyer 1632
Michel Grossmann 1634

Simon Lercher 1634
Heinrich Hartmann 1639
Jakob Mathroner 1641
Christel Kiselbrunner 1645
David Lachner 1645
Hans Hueber 1645
Andreas Hiller 1646
Jakob Litzebucher 1647
Hans Albrecht 1648
Balzer Rost 1648
Cuenz Port 1649
Hans Lang 1649
Felix Stribi 1649
Uhl Amsler 1649
Georg Gaul 1650
Valtin Fischer 1650
Georg Geer 1651
Georg Leopold 1653
Moses Rupertshauser 1653
Klaus Messner 1655

Christoff Adler 1658
Hans Friedrich Küntsche 1659
Heinrich Wisser 1660
Michel Milder 1660
Joseph Lercher 1662
Andreas Binder 1662
Andreas Ehrenpreis 1662
Moses Bruckner 1665
Hans Blessing 1666
Joseph Stamler 1667
Esaias Way 1668
Georg Schultes 1671
Andreas Winter taken to Turkey 1633
Christel Lerch taken to Turkey 1633

Servants of the Word in Johannes Rücker's time
Johannes Rücker
Hans Mayer
Johannes Born
Caspar Eglauch

Tobias Breundl
Tobias Bersch
Jakobus Ketenacker
Christoff Baumhauer
Benjamin Poley
Johannes Hilscher
Erasmus Strauss
Andreas Rosenberger
Moses Würz
Johannes Mülder
Andreas Kuehn
Hänsl Esdras
Jakob Weiss

Rücker is the last-named Elder in Die älteste Chronik.
***************

1622 Deterioration of the Church in Hungary
A short but accurate and comprehensive account has been given of
how the church of God in Moravia began and took shape, and how it
spread in spite of many hard trials. The people were gathered and church

community was built up. In the year 1550, they had to undergo sharp
persecution for their faith and many of them gave witness to the truth with
their blood. We have heard what hardships and grief they had to suffer
because of robbery, murder, and arson during the long and terrible wars of
1605 and 1619. In 1622, they were driven almost empty-handed from their
homes in Moravia for the sake of their faith in divine truth. They had to
move into Hungary, where they eked out a meager existence amid strife
and misfortune, particularly during the last Turkish and Tartar war of
1663.
Now it will be shown how all Christian virtues began to weaken in
this church community which had once been granted such great light.
Large numbers left the brotherhood until at last the community was ruined
and came to an end.
The entry for 1622 reports that many fell away when the brotherhood
was persecuted and driven from Moravia. Many faithful-hearted people
were lost to the church through all the ills that accompany a time of war:
terror, grief, hunger, cold and exposure, disease, and also an outbreak of
pestilence among the populace. One-third of our people died that year. As
a result, the church community which survived at Sabatisch and
neighboring places in Hungary was quite small.
At the same time, all kinds of abuses crept in during those dark days
of war. Greed, selfishness, arrogance, and other disorders were apparent.
This grew worse and worse, until the deadly evil could no longer be
withstood. Around 1656, taking as his text Isaiah 63, a God-fearing and
zealous servant of the Word spoke in great grief about these
circumstances. What reeking foulness the Thirty Years War has brought
with it, and what unjust dealings it has taught! Wherever you go, you
could write about it for a whole month. Among us, too, the leaven of
wickedness has spread so much that nothing can rid us of it.
Another complained bitterly about the rampant growth of evil. Dear
brothers, it would take an entire day to spell out all the ugly faults which
have taken hold in the community during the past thirty years and are now
so deep-rooted that no plow can tear them from our flesh. Even if it were

drawn by a hundred strong horses and the plowshare set six feet down into
the soil, it could never reach the root of the evil to cut it away.
Dear brother Valentin Winter, and after him brothers Heinrich
Hartmann and Andreas Ehrenpreis with other fellow workers, fought these
evils with zeal and determination. They spoke powerfully of God's
judgment and punishment but with no effect. Little improvement
followed. It almost seemed that God had withdrawn his blessing from the
brotherhood and that they were under his sharp displeasure.
It is written of Israel that when the Lord God began to weary of them
because they had left him and his law, he delivered them into the power of
their enemies. Every kind of misery overtook them, for the Lord wanted
through discipline to turn them back to him again. But as nothing helped,
he drove them from his presence.
The Hutterian Church nearly came to the same point. Because it had
left the first love and had lost the first purity and integrity, the Lord
removed its lampstand from its place.
Even in 1598, when Klaus Braidl was Elder (a flourishing time with
forty places in Moravia housing large numbers) there was a noticeable loss
of the church's original integrity The brothers and sisters no longer gave
such a clear witness of godliness and dedication as in the time of Jakob
Hutter, Hans Amon, and Leonhard Lanzenstiel. Even Cardinal Franz von
Dietrichstein pointed this out to them in 1605, when he told them that they
were not as devout and industrious as they had been in earlier years. He
criticized the craftsmen for no longer working as reliably as before. This
complaint cannot have been groundless, for brother Klaus Braidl urged the
workmen to be more industrious so that the church community would not
completely lose its good name.
In some respects, the church was certainly as sound as ever. The word
of truth was preached clearly and purely, matters of judgment were
handled with justice, and undoubtedly there were still many thousands of
God-fearing, dedicated brothers and sisters. Yet there were many
superficial people among them without the fear of God in their hearts. We
can draw this conclusion when we see that the elders of the church at that

time set up a schedule for daily work for nearly every group of craftsmen.
No doubt this was necessary because of the slothful workers; one can well
imagine how lazy they were. At the beginning, there was no such
regulation of the day's work. It was not needed, for each one served God
and the brothers and sisters lovingly and faithfully in a simple, childlike
spirit. Each one freely put himself and all he had at the disposal of the
church. In time, the quota that was fixed for each day's output led to
further disorder and gave a loophole for another abuse to come in among
the fleshly-minded. After completing the work assigned for each day, they
worked for their own interests. Although the elders put a stop to this, some
disorder always persisted.
I will give one more instance of the gradual loss of the first clarity.
Jakob Hutter wrote in his letter to the governor of Moravia:
All our words and deeds, our conduct, our way of life, are there for all
men to see. Rather than knowingly wrong a man to the value of a penny,
we would let ourselves be robbed of a hundred gulden. Rather than strike
our worst enemy with our hand - to say nothing of spears, swords, and
halberds such as the world uses - we would let our own lives be taken. As
anyone can see, we have no physical weapons, neither spears nor muskets.
If these words are put side by side with the story of what happened at
Sabatisch in 1633 to a lord by the name of Franz Nágy-Michaly, one must
in all honesty say that a great deal had been lost. Certainly no one would
have acted in this way at the time of Jakob Hutter and Leonhard
Lanzenstiel.
It seems as if God meant to punish the brothers and sisters for their
unfaithfulness, just as he once punished Israel in order to make them mend
their ways. Already in brother Klaus Braidl's time, the Lord disciplined
them with a harsh rod. During the Hungarian rebellion of 1605, the Turks
and Tartars carried off some 240 souls into Muslim slavery, and all had to
suffer fear and horror, robbery of their goods, fire, and murder as well. In
the Thirty Years' War, the Lord's hand lay even more heavily upon them,
as can be read in the first part of this book. They themselves saw all this as
punishment and discipline from God for their sins.

In 1667, a devout servant of the Word addressing the church said,
There are times when God the Lord must wash away the filth from the
daughter of Zion through plunder and fire, and in place of her vanity and
haughtiness there will be a stench. (Isaiah. 4:4 3:24)
God stripped them of worldly goods and reduced them to nearly
nothing. And when they thought themselves in utter poverty after all the
pillaging, murder, and burning of the ruinous war, Cardinal von
Dietrichstein unjustly robbed them of most of their food and money.
Shortly afterward in the following year, they were expelled from Moravia
and driven out empty-handed.
Even when they reached Hungary, they met one trial and disaster after
another. As has been indicated earlier in this book, God visited them with
war, famine, sickness, fire, and flood.
The false members, who lacked the fear of God, wanted to have the
upper hand over the sincere and upright and paid no attention to the
discipline and afflictions from God. The evils grew worse as time went on,
and all kinds of injustice rapidly gained ground. This happens whenever
the ruin and collapse of a people is near at hand.
God the Lord always sends his servants and messengers to warn the
children of men of their approaching ruin. In his love and faithfulness he
spoke to his church community and did not fail them. In this otherwise
depressing time, God gave his people zealous and richly gifted teachers, as
can be seen from their writings. These servants of the Word foresaw God's
punishment. They foresaw the disaster, the decline and collapse of the
church that lay ahead, and they constantly urged the people to repent,
warning them of God's wrath and judgment.
***************

1650s Examples from old teachings

Yet just as it was with all servants and messengers of the Lord from
the beginning of the world, so it was with these laborers of God. From all
sides, they poured out their grief in their teachings and sermons because,
like the prophet Jeremiah and others, they meet with bitter enmity and
hatred from unrepentant, hardened people. I will give some examples from
their own words.
About 1652, a preacher speaking on John 20 complains: God help us,
for those bullheaded people treat their leaders and servants of the Word so
abusively with their slander and contempt, driving them to the brink of
despair, like weaving straw into their beards and bringing black smoke
into the house of their hearts, that they may well rob them of all courage.
At night when the servants are asleep, the merciful and compassionate
Spirit shows them in dreams how sharply he must speak to this or that man
or woman, to fornicators, thieves, adulterers, drunkards, and liars, when he
comes to their help and prays to God [to forgive] their sins. Even with
such longing in their hearts, the servants suffer mockery and dishonor, for
those who ought to love and protect them repay good with evil.
Speaking on the same subject, the same servant at another time
explained Psalm 126: David's words are particularly comforting to the
servants of the Gospel who find very few with open hearts when they bring
the seed of God's Word. If they cared for worldly reward, many preachers
would do better as fiddlers or bagpipers. Then they would be well liked
and would have the joy of making their hearers happy. But because they
have to put fear into people, have to discipline and restrain their fleshly
will, they are so hated and rejected that they often have good reason to say
with Jeremiah, 'Alas, my mother, you
have borne me to clash and quarrel with all the land!' Thus they are
bound to be hated, and often have to lament and sigh bitterly, 'O God!
What is to be done? There is nothing on earth more precious than your
word. Yet nothing is less treasured or more despised. If only I might be
free of my service without committing sin, I know I would have friends
again! But now everyone loathes me. I could weep aloud at the mere
thought of it. (Jeremiah 15:10)

Yet another servant of God spoke in 1655, about Isaiah 49: What are
we to think of this? Isn't this exactly how it is? Don't our eyes see it
plainly and our ears hear the cry that goes up from us all? We all recognize
what is lacking in ourselves and in others, where we have left the right
path, and how we must change. God the Lord makes it plain to us again
and again and does not hide it from us. Our hearts respond to this and say,
'Yes! Amen! It should be so. That would be right and good.' Yet afterward
many members (the innocent excepted) act as if they were only jesting.
Such people mock God. They let him speak and work in vain. Today all
those with pure intentions are left to see and grieve like the prophets and
apostles that overwhelming disaster is coming, as it came over Jerusalem
and the whole land of Judea.
Yes, God's servants are deserted and hated. They are often begrudged
their food and the things that they need, that in God's sight belong to them
in all justice according to the Holy Scripture. To sum up, their work is in
vain, they spend their strength for nothing, and one after the other goes to
his last rest. Those who come after will learn little; soon they will know
nothing.
Only God the Lord knows what will come of it all. It could happen
(but may God prevent it) that very soon thick darkness falls on our
descendants. But it could also be that we lose the way and come to ruin in
a time of peace without any particular ordeal. We should therefore pay
attention to these words of Scripture, The time of affliction is coming. The
day of reckoning is here. Let Israel know this. Because your sins are so
many and your hostility so great, the prophet is considered a fool and the
inspired man a senseless idiot.' (Hosea 9:7) Unfortunately, this direction is
now widespread among the heedless members who outnumber the Godfearing and want to have ascendancy over them. Both secretly and openly,
some with cunning, some with angry words, some with argument, they try
to get what will only harm them. So we could well begin weeping aloud
and crying with the prophet Habakkuk, 'O Lord, how long must I cry out?
Why do you let me toil and struggle? Outrage and violence go on before
my eyes. Strife breaks out and quarrels multiply. The law is powerless,
justice cannot be practiced, and evil men are valued above good.'
(Habakkuk 1:1-4)

***************

1650s Examples from old teachings/laziness
To show how far the church had fallen and what sins and abuses had
found their way in, I will combine extracts from the writings and sermons
of the old, devout servants of the Word. This may serve as a warning to us
and our descendants, so that we do our utmost to guard against falling at
the same places.
In the first place, contempt for God's Word, the fact that many had no
love or enthusiasm for hearing the teachings, must be seen in all its
gravity as sickness and decay in the church of God. Sleepiness during
meetings for worship is the cause of such frequent complaints in the old
writings that they cannot all be quoted here, so I will include only a few.
While explaining Luke 2, a preacher complained: Where people
consider God's Word annoying and tedious, a light and insipid food, there
God's fatherly blessing cannot draw near to keep them faithful. Their inner
life dries up and shrivels. People with little desire to hear God's Word are
sometimes found in the midst of believers. How would it be if they had to
go to Jerusalem or to Bethlehem? For them that would be unheard of. It is
almost too much for some of them to get from home to the meeting.
Previously, in the world, they would walk a mile or more to go dancing or
to the fairground. Now they can hardly cross the threshold to hear the
Word of the Lord. Formerly they could spend half the night at such
amusements with unflagging energy and absorption. Now they want to
sleep if they are required to listen to the Lord's Word for even a short time.
The following is from a teaching on Acts 2: Such evil is spreading in
the church community (the innocent excepted) that it is said, 'This brother
or sister always seems to be drunk.' If you meet him early, his breath
smells of brandy; midday or evening he smells of the local wine, and he
stumbles in his speech. If his feet were affected like his tongue, he would
not be able to walk. And, of course, before going to the sermon his great

zeal for worship prompts him to drink a good glassful of spirits and eat a
slice of bread so that he can hold out until breakfast by having a gentle
sleep for an hour or two.
The commentary on this chapter continues: O dear brothers, please
forgive us! We are not referring to those who are glad and eager to listen.
But we are very much troubled that we have to warn many among you
about their very lazy ways. If they summon up enough reverence to
overcome themselves and go to the teaching, they do it more from fear of
men than from genuine eagerness. With many it seems that the evil spirit
in them is like the one in King Saul, never more at peace than when David
plays soothing music on his harp. These people sink into such pleasant
slumber that their intense devotion is scarcely strong enough to keep them
awake for the prayer. They cannot tell whether the preacher has spoken
about Herod, Pilate, or Caiaphas.
O dear brothers, in the prophet Ezekiel's time the people of Israel
must have been more zealous. They at least considered the prophet of the
Lord as a singer of love songs wooing them in a beautiful voice, and all
the fleshly-minded were happy to hear him. But now it is scarcely like that
anymore. The people have had enough. They do not even want to listen.
Their only desire is to sleep, and they settle down to do so. A few years
back, if someone was overtaken by sleepiness, he would stand up and set
his will against it. People woke each other up and the sleeper would blush
for shame. Now it almost seems that those who are awake are no more
attentive than the sleepy.
O dear brothers, if we were to preach for two hours each day, we are
afraid that only five or six people would come. Most people (the innocent
excepted) are so overfull and tired from the weekly meeting, that it seems
to affect them like a gluttonous feast, and they look as if about to vomit.
How would it be, if they were expected to come daily? We fear that some
of them would want to do away with such an uncomfortable interruption
and replace it with daily feasting on wine, meat, and fish!
Then they would think of God while enjoying conversations about old
stories like Til Eugenspiegel, or Schimpf und Ernst, or tales in honor of
God by wise people such as Aesop and Hans Sachs. It would be just what

one sees in taverns when drunken people talk together about spiritual
things, or start up a psalm, using God's name with wine and beer running
down their jackets, until the dogs under the table cannot help howling at
their 'music.' Doors and windows have to be flung open to let out the
disgusting smell of this devotional meeting. Yet for many it would
certainly prove more attractive. That is exactly why there are ignorant
peoples, like the Israelite ox and ass without, who even after thirty, forty,
or fifty years know absolutely nothing about God, or Christ, or the Holy
Spirit, who neither have nor recognize faith, love, peace, obedience, or
constancy. So faith, with all the virtues dependent on it, dwindles and is
lost, until it seems that it will be gone altogether. O God! protect those
who come after us!
On Wisdom 7 the following was said: Unfortunately, it would often
seem necessary to do as the world does and ring the bell three times to call
people to church. Or the watchman should waken them at morning; then
the steward and after awhile his helper should repeat the call to pray and to
give thanks to God. Or maybe some of them should have men-at-arms
with leather straps to whip up enthusiasm among them. (Those who come
gladly are not meant, dear brothers!)
In a teaching on 1 John 2, the sleepy listeners were again taken to
task. It says: Maybe even in those days, too, there were people so given to
sleeping that they slept straight through a long winter's night, for twelve or
thirteen hours at a stretch; then, on hearing what the Lord wanted to say to
them, fell from sheer zeal into such a good sound slumber, that quite a few
had a struggle not to sleep through the prayer. Often such people can say
remarkably little about the sermon and have even completely missed
hearing what chapter it was on. The sleepy virgins at least woke at
midnight, but such people are so tired and sated, that it would seem they
never sleep so well as when the Word of God is lulling them, making
music for them as David did for Saul, and setting any stirring of their
consciences at rest.
In 1655, a servant of the Word at Kesselsdorf spoke his mind in the
plainest terms on the verse from Psalm 127:2, He gives to his beloved
while they sleep. He said: If this verse were taken literally, the lazy, sleepy

virgins would have come out better than the wise, and all the thousands of
lazy louts and good-for-nothings would far outstrip the hard workers and
home lovers in their efforts for the good of body and soul. Dear brothers,
let us hold up this mirror and look at ourselves in it. Isn't it a fact that
many of you, even in our little meetings here, gulp down this verse
without thinking about it, taking it raw, or only boiled in water, so that
none of its pith and strength gets through to you, and it stays as undigested
as a hard cherry stone?
Just look about you and see how many are sleeping during the
teaching, how many are like the Seven Sleepers and do not come to make
their offering of prayer and praise even when they well could. Maybe they
hope it can all be done by sleeping. No, certainly not! The psalm is not
talking about some kind of fool's paradise, but about the heavenly land the
Father has promised us. And that is not to be won by idling and sleeping.
Otherwise, we might as well call a few by name, pick some out here or
there, and gather a whole company or regiment to serve the church, people
who have not prayed for a year because of the state of their consciences,
nor praised God, nor listened to his will and Word, not to mention never
sharing even a little in the communal work. With their refined and delicate
hearts, why shouldn't they sleep for two hours during the sermon and for
twelve hours at night? Why shouldn't they borrow a couple of hours from
the day and its sunshine, close the windows, pull the curtains so that the
light won't bother their eyes and even turn their faces away from it?
Meanwhile, the servant of the Word can storm and rage because he has to
turn a blind eye to them. I am addressing the guilty, dear brothers.
In 1658, a servant of the Word expounded John 4 somewhat in this
way: Dear brothers, it is not to be doubted that if the world allowed us to
teach people the truth, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in all its
clearness and sharpness, we would find that many thousands would
forsake their sins and live in the fear of God. Perhaps more than among us,
because we already have too much of it so that it becomes a routine. We
are as sick and tired of the bread of Heaven as the unthankful Israelites
were. But will not such ungrateful people, like the inhabitants of Samaria,
arouse the flame of wrath God has in store for such lazy drones and sleepy

virgins (we might well say lazy slatterns), redoubling it on them until they
cannot endure it?
When the Lord's Word was taken to some people they said, 'My dear
brother, this is not a suitable moment; there isn't time now.' Often brothers
have had to go away sadly and lay the case before God, saying, 'If I kept a
wine cellar or had material gifts to distribute, I would be a welcome and
respected guest in people's houses. But my wares are so cheap I give them
away and nobody wants them.' Nothing is as good an offer as sermons and
teaching and yet nothing is so little valued by nearly everyone. That is
why, almost everywhere, there is no faith.
In the year 1659 a servant of the Word at Kesselsdorf spoke about
Jeremiah 13 in these terms, after reading out Deuteronomy 32:15:
This should be noted by all the lazy, listless people who never find
greater boredom than when expected to sit a couple of hours for the
teaching and sermon and hear their Father praised and honored. The
moment the teaching begins, they long for the end. Or they eat heartily
beforehand, filling their bellies with bread and brandy so that in their
boredom they can sink into a pleasant sleep, let the two short hours go by
as quickly as possible, and give their lazy, putrid carcasses some profit.
Quite a few need straps around them, as children do, to prevent their
mouths dropping open; for they hang their heads like the thieves on the
cross, as if their jaws were broken or would soon break. Or else they resent
the brother who is teaching and have no confidence in him because he will
not condone their conduct. Or they are present in body, but absent in
thought.
Other writings in the same vein could be quoted, but we have
included enough to make clear how bad these things had become. I will
therefore go to the next point.
The cold and lifeless spirit, now ruling in spiritual matters in the
church, was reflected in temporal matters. At that time the church still
lived in community of goods; no one had to clothe himself or earn his own
livelihood, or trouble himself about protection from the magistrates. It
was all arranged by the church for everyone alike. Consequently, everyone

was expected to work hard and do his best. But in the course of time this
lapsed, and in later years there were many lazy, unconscientious people
who neither asked nor cared whether anything was earned or
accomplished. As a result, a daily work quota was fixed. Then the lazy and
indifferent had to do their share if they wanted to stay in the community
and not be less respected than others.
However diligent and reliable some were, we must give sober
consideration to the sad picture described by the preachers. In 1665, a
servant of the Word in Kesselsdorf, with Psalm 127 for his text, said:
When we read here of toiling for bread, we see that we cannot feel
free to lie long in bed and laze until the sun has climbed a good way up in
the sky, then knock off work early, before the sun has set. There are quite a
few, indeed more than enough - I could address them by name - who have
this as their favorite verse to the advantage of their lazy bodies and the
hurt of their souls. They actually wear out their neighbors who work until
their limbs fail, and they suck the marrow from their bones, living in the
community like maggots that feed on others. They will certainly have to
give an account for it. Yet they have the impudence and presumption to
say that they are doing their utmost and cannot do more. Christ tells them,
'You are those who justify yourselves before men, but God knows your
hearts.' Paul's words from 2 Thessalonians are also applicable here, for he
says, 'When we were with you we laid down the rule: the man who will not
work shall not eat.' (2 Thessalonians 3) It is a great sin and shame if
someone belongs to the church community of the Lord and has no task
which demands all his efforts. He should set his hands to honest work and
produce something, so that he can give to the needy. Anyone deserves
blame when he is bone-lazy, working (if or when he works) less than a
child, yet outdoing everyone when it comes to eating, drinking, sleeping,
and showing off. This is detestable in the eyes of God and of all honorable
men. It will bring its own punishment. If people had to eat what they
earned themselves and were treated as Paul advises, how many men would
lose their wives and how many women their husbands? What a disgrace
that would be! They ought to blush scarlet so that we all know who they
are, and they should learn to improve their ways.

Another servant of the Word speaks very plainly to this condition in
explaining his text from John 4: Do you not say there are four months, etc.
To make the meaning clear, dear brothers, the church is and must be
established by the Holy Spirit. It is the only place where the true brotherly
love of the church can be practiced fairly and impartially, where the old
sick, lame, crippled, and blind, as well as the young and helpless, are cared
for because they believe in God and worship him from their hearts. Their
souls are pleasing to God and they will receive salvation, but they cannot
depart until it is God's will. In the meantime, they need food, drink,
clothing, and support, for they cannot earn it for themselves. They will and
must be provided for by the love of the church shown to them as if to the
Lord Jesus Christ (who has no need of such services), and all reward will
come from him.
Plainly, however, this glorious work of community has resulted in
many people being lazy. There are quite a few nowadays who hide away
and act as if they belong with those faithful members mentioned above
whom God has visited with infirmity. They work as little as or even less
than the infirm. What is still worse, they make a good thing of it for
themselves and grow sleek and fat in their feigned infirmity. It is wrong
and an injustice before God and man. If Paul refused to allow it among the
Thessalonians, why do we? It is bringing increasing poverty to the
community and no one wants to admit his guilt. Consequently, discontent
is creeping in among the believers. Their muttering and grumbling sounds
like the buzzing of a swarm of bees about to fly from the hive, or like a
storm brewing in the mountains that makes us say 'Hail or some heavy
downpour is coming. Let us hope it won't damage the fruit and grapes or
set fire to houses and barns. May God prevent it!'
In another sermon we read: How many there are who have no zeal or
reverence about coming to prayer. If only they would pray from their
hearts! If only they would listen to the admonition and instruction in the
meetings and show the good effect in their lives! One's attitude soon
shows in daily work, for if a person is diligent at work it means he is
equally diligent in godly things. We often hear laments that in the olden
days people put their hearts into their work and tried to do it well, but that
is no longer the case. People are lazy and listless, and do not care what

gets done as long as the day goes by. No one is as hardworking and
conscientious as people used to be.
Such laziness and idling could only result in God's blessing
decreasing and withdrawing both spiritually and temporally. Then the
community could no longer provide such plentiful food and drink as in
earlier times. This led to discontent, to grumbling and ungratefulness,
which in turn gave rise to many complaints, as may be seen in the
following writings.
On the text in Acts 2, They ate their food with gladness and
simplicity of heart, praising God, (Acts 2:46) the commentary runs: Christ
the Lord, the prophets, apostles, and the other disciples did not shout for
wine and a full belly like some falsely pious People do nowadays. Just as
the wolf howls, 'Lamb, lamb,' so some of them howl, 'Wine, wine! Meat,
meat!' If they do not get it, they soon voice feelings in a way that reveals
the wolf, swine, and raucous raven in their hearts. They think, 'Feed me,
and then I'll work.'
At first God's children ate their food with gladness and simplicity of
heart, praising God. They were given what was available. They behaved
like simple-hearted children of God, not like greedy, never-satisfied
people do, whose eyes are bigger than their stomachs, whose hearts and
mouths are full of abuse if they are not given what they want. Even when
they receive it, and even while they are still gnawing on the bones, they
start grumbling again about the person who gave it to them because they
wanted more.
***************

1650s Examples from old teachings/gossip
One notices that slander and back-biting also had found their way
into the community with a great deal of stupid, unpleasant gossip and
untruthfulness, for these things are strongly admonished in many sermons
and teachings. Several examples are given here.

After speaking of what happens in the world, a servant of the Word
continues explaining Psalm 41 as follows:
Oh, if only the body of Christ (the church of Christ) were free from
the enemies who speak hypocritically to their neighbors with sweet and
honeyed words, but are actually concealing poison! All the while they
justify the verse:

Smile at me and then betray –
That is now the world's own way.
Nowadays it's all the fashion
Friendly words to hide deception.
While the lips say, 'Go with God,'
The heart says, 'Friend, be on your guard.'

There are some false brothers and sisters who, if they know two
people have disagreed, immediately find their way to one of them and say,
'My, my! Whatever have you done to that person? He does nothing but talk
about you and run you down. I heard all sorts of things about you. But I
know you're not like that, my dear brother or sister. I was really quite
upset.' And when he has caught at the slightest word and got hold of a few
things with his idle, hellish tongue, he goes straight to the other and adds
fuel to the fire on every side. But when the fire is burning briskly, he
begins to get uneasy and he tries to wriggle out of the affair. God protect
us from godless people!
After quoting a text from Sirach, he continues: That is how it is with
these disturbers of the peace, snakes in the grass, shoddy, double-tongued full of envy, deceit, strife, craftiness - disturbers of the peace, two-faced
people who distort and exaggerate a slight remark, work on others'

feelings in order to betray them and stir up strife. They gather up their
murderous arrows through lies and through provoking peaceable hearts.
When they have their quivers full and their hearts brimming with poison,
they shoot these arrows at any target they choose, but mostly at those they
hate and resent. (Sirach 11:30-32)
Many have wept and lamented that once pierced by the deadly
poisonous arrows of lying gossip, they could never recover from the
wound. They would rather have been robbed by mountain bandits and been
wounded in body. But here they had been robbed of their good reputation;
they had been wounded in their hearts, and after many years the wounds
were still unhealed.
In the teaching on Psalm 120 there is a lament from the faithful
believers: O my God, what can I say? When I see the man, I shudder. For
he has lied about me so horribly, gossiped and spread slander about me
until it sears me like flames. My heart is full of burning pain. If he had
spoken the truth, I would have taken it to heart and tried to improve. But
because he lied in order to disgrace me, to show me as utterly despicable
and to hurt me, I cannot easily get over it. I know very well that I should
live at peace with others. But how can I be at peace with him? However
often I make up my mind to do so, as soon as I think about it, my heart is
seized with such unbearable pain that I feel as if it would break, and the
marrow of my bones turn to dirty slush.
And so people often speak in the way Paul did: 'Alexander the
coppersmith did me much harm. May the Lord repay him according to his
works.'
A little further on we read: How often this has happened, especially
when somebody was hoping to marry! How much distortion of fact and
lying talk has been directed against such a one out of personal likes and
dislikes, resentment, or envy - unfounded, grossly untrue gossip without
any knowledge or reflection, enough to make the heart sick and the spirit
fail!
It is plain enough that the sin against the eighth commandment,
against love to one's neighbor, against holy peace, has crept in among the

faithful very quietly and unobtrusively, spreading like a pestilence and
becoming so ingrained that no one discerns it anymore. That is the worst
part of it. If someone was found to be a fornicator, a thief, or a drunkard, if
he used violence or cursed and swore, he would receive the right discipline
belonging to God's justice. Yet distorted stories and slander, which cannot
possibly exist without lies, are becoming far too common and are slipping
in everywhere by every loophole and cranny. One should consider further
the teaching on Proverbs 6.
All this gossip, slander, and back-biting led to disunity; arguments
and quarrels broke out. In such cases it is very rare for matters to stop at
the first offense committed, because when a member has lost the pure
mind of Christ, sin and injustice gives rise to another. We again have
evidence of this from the complaints against it.
A good and faithful servant of the Word speaks very sharply, taking
Wisdom 7 for his text. Among other things, he quoted from 1 Peter 3, and
said:
This means that a witness should be given, and it is not meant only
for the women, but for all of us, whether we wear skirts or pants. However,
as women are the ones mentioned, the question arises where we may find
such a witness among them.
***************

1650s Examples from old teachings/witness given by sisters
I ask all innocent sisters not to be angry or distressed about this
pointed question. There may be some who are not a poor example. And
however bad the guilty may feel, the important thing is that they change
for the better, whether young or old, grown-ups or children, yours or mine.
They should use this question as a mirror to see what sort of persons they
are.

It is to be feared, though, that they will find little that witnesses
according to the Spirit, and far more that is opposed by the Spirit of God
and of Peter. Many would gladly serve their vanity by wearing gold
ornaments if they had them. Those who have beautiful silken braids would
be happy to run around bareheaded to show off their best points, just like
people taking a basket of goods to market and advertising them. If they
could get hold of fine clothes, they would be glad to wear them, as young
women in the world do (who are sometimes given a different name).
Instead of calling their husband 'master' as Sarah did, they call him a
fool, a hog, dirt, and still worse. Instead of a gentle, quiet spirit
imperishable in the hidden depths of the heart, there is a spirit hated and
abhorred by God, a noisy, disturbing spirit from the abyss that leads to
ugly shrieking and screaming, to public arguments and quarrels. If they
are not treated in a way that suits their flesh and their own opinions, they
rear up in hate, envy, discontent, and anger, venting every kind of slander
to defend and avenge themselves.
Any true-hearted person can see what sort of witness that is. My God!
What a shame and disgrace it often is when one is forced to listen to
people quarreling and screaming so much at each other that no one knows
what they are saying. They sound like cats yowling in March when they
fight with each other, enough to make one's hair stand on end. Sometimes
it sounds even worse - horrible and bloodcurdling like dogs biting each
other or wolves howling in winter.
It is unpleasant to speak and to hear of, but indeed, people must
change, otherwise there is neither hope of salvation nor trace of comfort to
be found anywhere in Holy Scripture. This is no witness to the spirit of
God; but earthly, human, bestial and devilish.
It is a cause of real concern that while some have been excluded
because they were drunk or for another lapse, a spitfire like this, harboring
an evil spirit, is treated far too leniently. She is not summoned before the
church and put under discipline; she is let off with an admonition which
she probably never heard because of the shrieking.

A bitter foreboding about this evil is contained in a teaching on Psalm
133:
It is much to be feared that this wicked tendency to discord and
disunity has already been at work like a leaven and spread through the
whole lump of dough, that this poison has put death into the whole pot of
food, and that it cannot be removed without the greatest pain and sorrow.
O God, have pity on the peace lovers and soon deliver them, for dear
brothers, if we look the facts in the face, hasn't this poison of envy, hate,
and strife, like rust eating away at iron and steel, already weakened and
consumed more than half the hard metal of love? Unhappily, this can be
seen and heard only too clearly in the community. And no one wants to
admit his guilt; people see only their neighbors' faults, and so become
doubly guilty. Thus there is no joy or blessing, no faith, loyalty, peace,
love, or trust, and every day we come nearer to utter ruin.
The old teachings show that modesty, chastity, and honorable conduct
were practiced less and less, and the opposite was becoming the custom. I
will quote only two passages to illustrate this, and leave the rest.
After a quotation of Tobit's words to his son, Guard yourself well
from unchastity, etc., we find this passage: (Tobit 4:12)
There are shameless people who presume to say to those in the flower
of youth, 'My, when are you going to get married? You're grown up now,
strong, and good-looking,' and so on. Or they say something coarser and
more unsuitable, words from the fleshly creature come to roost in their
hearts - words that could show them the sort of guest they are harboring.
In years past, we were often blamed and mocked by worldly people
because our young people born in the community were so modest and
chaste, and as they grew up knew nothing from anyone about how this or
that happened, even though it was allowed according to God's order,
honorably and without sin, as part of married life.
Although despised by the world, it was a glorious ornament and
crown of honor for the church of Christ that such chastity was instilled in

words and ways, appearance and behavior. It was done by each one
keeping watch on himself and also confronting, warning, and admonishing
others to prevent anything foul and evil from finding a place in them.
Now our trouble is that there are people who are irresponsible, even
though some are gray-headed (the innocent excepted). Even if they do not
give an unchaste example by their behavior in public, it is obvious from
what they say. They talk as shamelessly as harlots, pimps, and sodomites,
and so inflame the young people (still immature youths) that although
these youngsters have kept themselves pure, they are eager for honorable
marriage to avoid unchastity. Then the gossips have the effrontery to turn
face and to speak in as evil a way as before.
'My, oh my ! How things have changed in the community! Years back
such a very young girl would never have been asked to marry, and a mere
boy like that would never have been allowed to request marriage. What are
our brothers thinking about? I would have thought they would have held
back more with such children.' They completely forget the coarse things
they themselves have said, more like soldiers' filthy talk. They thrust in
the lighted torch and then walk away from the fire. But God the Lord
knows and will remember in his own good time.
The teaching on 2 Kings 2 is explained in this way: We have to cry
out in grief - if laments are of any avail, then let us groan and sob to God
in heaven! - for we are only too sharply aware of the rapid spread of
lukewarmness and indifference, of bone-laziness and sinful idleness.
We find this even among the older people, who dare to say that they
wish they would soon die, and that the Lord would deliver them. It is the
same with those who were thought to be leading passably good lives, as
well as with the sowers of discord, who usually want to have people's good
opinion and cannot bear to be despised. To tell the truth, one won't easily
find such persons at meetings for prayer and thanksgiving to God, since
God the Lord and Jesus Christ are truly present through the Spirit as we
speak of their glory and honor. If that is said about a man, whatever he is
called and whoever he may be, he should know there is something very
wrong with him; he certainly has a seared conscience and has turned
against his true food.

A man may not deserve exclusion for adultery or other sins, but
deserve it just as much for giving himself up to prides and laziness. When
Elijah meets with Elisha, when disciples walk together and talk of the
glorious themes mentioned above, then God himself is with them. And
you, you lazy dog, cannot possibly join them for a portion of God's Spirit
to fall on your. For shame! It is clear as daylight that you don't belong
there. It can be seen from this new form of whoremongering which has
spread like a vile rats' nest. And there is still no sign of betterment among
some of you.
Marriages were no longer arranged and weddings no longer held as
taught and advised by the Church's Confession of Faith. Disorderly
practices and a great deal of self-will were gaining ground. Peter
Ridemanns, Confession of Faith
Therefore, in 1643, the elders sent a directive to all communities and
disciplined all offenses against church order. As this brought light and
clarity into the situation, I will include the text here.
***************

1643 Points brought to the attention of the Church
Sabatisch, February 10, 1643
The Elders have decided to bring the following points to the attention
of the Church
There are ample reasons for bringing the matter forward although we
are not eager to do so. Many complaints have reached us, many believing
people are deeply troubled, and we fear we are displeasing God and
provoking his wrath. Therefore, we feel it our duty to go into the subject
and warn the church. Firstly, against the disgraceful matchmaking which
goes on when there is a friendship or only an acquaintance between a
brother and a sister. Without any sense of propriety people take on
themselves to suggest a Marriage.

It is not only older people who arrange matches and who should be
thoroughly ashamed of themselves. Younger people do it, too.
There is a great deal of carrying messages, notes, and little gifts from
one house to another, against all modesty and right restraint. These sinful
and harmful practices should be rooted out of the church.
Consider what an impossible thing it is when an old woman or an
impudent young girl approaches such a brother or sister to suggest
Marriage with this person or that.
No brother, old or young, has the authority to arrange a Marriage
privately. It dishonors God. Each year when the Church Orders are read,
the servants of the Word are forbidden to do this.
They are to direct the people to follow the old customs and entrust
themselves to God,
If the servants of the Word are not permitted to do it, how can all and
sundry be free to continue this practice which now seems common among
us?
It leads to further disorder, for already we find some who do not want
to ask for Marriage if they do not know what partner has been arranged for
them and whom they will receive in Marriage.
Courtship, matchmaking, and urging each other into Marriage cause
shame and sorrow. Afterwards, some people change their minds and the
rejected partners feel disgraced and despised. It is neither Christian nor
brotherly to betray a fellow believer in such a way, and it cannot be
tolerated or ignored any longer.
It is still worse to wound one another by slander and evil gossip, to
heap unfounded accusations on the innocent until all fear of God is lost
and people fall into deliberate sin. For we know it is written, Him who
slanders his neighbor secretly, I will destroy. And: A slanderer's words are
sharp arrows which wound the depths of the heart. Again, The blow of a
whip raises a welt, but a blow of the tongue crushes the bones. These

things go on quite unnoticed by some who never realize how far from the
right road they have come and think they have done only the right thing.
All who long for right and honorable conduct should be ready to
speak to those who do these things. If this does not help, they should call
in others, so that superficiality and sin may be prevented.
In some cases, once a person is persuaded to a match, he refuses to
give it up no matter what anyone else says.
Not to speak of the times when a brother or sister hears a false report,
gives in, and accepts a partner who should never have been suggested, but
the matchmaker made everything sound simply wonderful. Afterwards,
everyone has to admit it is a pity that this partner or the other has such a
wife or husband. Some can no longer serve the church as before. Many
have had to say with shame and self-contempt, He or she tricked me into
it. Oh, if only I had known, I would not have done it. While others laugh at
their stupidity, they must weep over it.
These and similar offenses against church order not only cause a lot
of misery, but they lead to sin because people are wanting to marry
according to their own will instead of in the fear of God. This is why, in
very early times mankind incurred so much guilt before God that the
whole world was destroyed by his wrath and blotted out by the Flood. All
we are told is that the offenders saw that the daughters of men were
beautiful and married any of them they chose. (Genesis 6:2)
Therefore, it would be good for us to follow God's order and the
example of our forefathers. We should trust God and our parents and
submit our wills to our brothers' direction. We should not be so arrogant
and sure of ourselves, despise all good advice, and assert in our self-will,
It must be this man or that woman and nobody else. That is not right.
For example, Abraham's servant traveled to Mesopotamia to get Isaac
a wife. Neither father nor son knew what kind of wife he would bring,
what her name would be, or what she would look like. The bridegroom and
his father, as well as the bride's father, mother, and brother, had to trust
entirely in the old servant, for they did not know each other. (Genesis 24)

In the same way Tobias obeyed his companion, although he took him
for a man and did not know he was an angel. When his companion advised
him to take Raguel's daughter, Sarah, he followed his advice. (Tobit 7) He
would have had good reason for grave misgivings, for Sarah had already
had seven husbands, and all had died; Tobias could well have feared the
same fate. Yet he did not have the audacity to reject his brother's advice.
He was a fine, handsome young man, but he obediently accepted direction,
and it brought blessing and joy for him and for his wife.
There are many similar examples in the Holy Scriptures. In the
community there are even more. Older people still living among us can
testify that many honorable brothers and sisters entrusted themselves to
God and declared their willingness for Marriage without knowing whom
they would receive. They would have been ashamed to hear a single word
about matchmaking. Yet these Marriages proved happier than those made
in the blindness of carnal love.
Even if things did not always turn out perfect, it was better and easier
for the unhappy partners when they had followed good advice than when
they had chosen for themselves. They could always think, Maybe it was
ordained by God and is meant to test me.
Therefore, a decision has been made that such matchmaking and selfwill shall not be allowed to continue. Anyone who notices such things is
not to promote or agree to them. We must no longer tolerate such
attachments and Marriages. For many reasons nothing good comes of
them, as has already been said.
It is not meant, however, that too much pressure should be put on a
person when there is a good reason for refusal. A God-fearing member can
speak to the brothers in confidence, and no one will hold it against him.
But the disorder must stop.
In past times it never arose. Nobody would have thought of making
such Marriage arrangements according to his own pleasure. The consent
given at such a self-chosen Marriage is concluding and confirming nothing
but a disorderly, man-made match. This contradicts the testimony of the
church, for at a wedding one is supposed to say that the couple is married

according to the advice of the elders and the example of the men of old.
Instead, the exact opposite has taken place. One should rather have said,
They married whomever they chose.
We wished to bring this to the brotherhood's notice as a warning and
to give everyone guidelines, so that no one acts imprudently and brings
unhappiness on himself. We will gladly help anyone who approaches the
matter honorably and in an orderly way. Then one can expect a good
outcome.
Secondly, we wish to point out what a shame and disgrace it is that
people are indulging in coarse, loose talk about Marriage. Old and young
alike start teasing the young people and talking of Marriage to them.
Those who talk in such a way should be ashamed of themselves! Instead of
reprimanding and punishing the young and teaching them the fear of God
and self-control, older people often give a bad example and teach the
opposite: idle gossip, silly joking, and derisive remarks which are not
fitting for God-fearing people. Young people and newcomers are often
badly hurt by such evil talk, for it incites them to sinful behavior. It results
in too early Marriages and one feels ashamed for them because many of
them have not yet learned a trade and can be of little help in earning a
livelihood. If they had to support themselves, they would never dream of
marrying.
This bad situation is made worse by unsuitable talk, whether in jest or
disapproval, for no attempt is made to protect young people from hearing
it. Anyone may hear it. Yet even in the world, decent people tell their
children to go out for a time when they need to discuss such subjects.
Therefore, we should accept this clear warning and take care what we say
and do. We should always remember we will have to give an account for it.
Thirdly, in connection with these disorders, we are compelled to say
something about the Lord's Supper. We should go to the meal of
remembrance out of reverence and godly zeal, to the comfort of our souls.
But it appears that some are more concerned with visiting in a sociable
way and going here and there with messages or on other errands - things
which are not fitting at any time and are particularly unfitting on such an
occasion.

People always find reasons for sparing no expense or inconvenience
to go to the most out-of-the-way places over water, mountains, and
valleys. They go through town and village, annoying people by the kind of
clothing they wear (to hide our poverty), and bringing us under suspicion
that some are concerned neither with the Lord's Word nor with his work.
Even though people are refused or advised against such trips, they get
so demanding that at last one has to give in. Then if one person receives
permission for a particular reason, the others make a right out of it, as if
one ought to let them go, too.
We want to ask that people do not expect us to make such difficult
decisions. Rather, each of you, in fear and trembling, should be concerned
whether you are worthy and prepared [to attend the Lord's Supper] so that
it may serve toward your salvation.
THE END.
***************

1650s Examples from old teachings/faithlessness
There is much more that could be cited from the brothers' writings
about the sins that had taken root in the church and had thrived like weeds.
But I find it too much. It is no pleasure to talk about the church's plight in
this time of decay. I would much rather describe how the church grew and
prospered. I will therefore make only a brief summary of another
complaint raised by the brothers in their writings. They grieved that most
of the people had left the true simplicity of Christ and the childlike
obedience they owed to God and the church. Instead, they were following
their own wishes and had lost their respect for order. They were no longer
satisfied with the kind of clothing customary in the community. Especially
those in service with the nobility and on their farms began to dress in a
worldly manner and give way to covetousness and self-seeking. They
secretly put away money for themselves, became accustomed to wine, and
were far too fond of it when they had opportunity to drink it. There were

also many dishonest people, swindlers who used the church's property for
their own purposes and afterwards lied about it, as well as other
quarrelsome and disturbing elements.
In 1653 a faithful, zealous preacher at Kesselsdorf said with reference
to Isaiah 58:
What can we say? We pour out our grief, nearly shouting ourselves
hoarse, because there is so little eagerness to attend the meeting and hear
the Lord's Word. But what's the good of it? It is even worse when we have
to admit: 'My God, words fail me!' This man and that woman and a whole
lot of others go regularly to hear the teaching; they pretend to know the
Lord's ways and can talk a great deal about them. But the minute the
meeting is over, one goes to his wine, another to his selfish pursuits, the
third to censor others with his gossip and slander, the fourth to argue and
quarrel, and the fifth to deceive and defraud. They are all disguised in
sheep's clothing. God have mercy, what is to become of it all!
One brother, when preaching on the verse in Matthew 2, Rachel
weeps for her children, said: (Matthew 2:18)
We lament to God that so few voices are heard weeping and mourning
for the heroes in faith who have proved steadfast and have been murdered.
Even when a number express such grief at times, there is still a lack of
reverence, for they cling to mammon, always wanting their own profit, and
their hearts and actions do not agree with their words.
Others who should listen carefully to the teaching are convinced that
our outcry is nothing but pointless talk, imagination, and foolishness. A
third group hurry to hear the teaching because they are bored and want to
see who is preacher, though they then may despise both him and his
message. A fourth group go to drink wine or prepare a meal and sit
together to eat and drink and talk about all kinds of trivial subjects, telling
with pride how they have bought this or that and discussing how they can
get hold of one thing or another to satisfy their vanity. The young people
go on the ice, catch birds, or find some other pastime. No one even
considers how sad and evil a condition we are in, how Zion, our mother, is
grieved and troubled and has grown weak and despised. We might well

rend our garments as Ezra did, and tear our hair and beards in sorrow that
our worship is now meaningless, our good order ruined, and the old
boundary markers moved away.
Dear brothers, how often have we been shown that our behavior is
contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the teachings of his holy
apostles, and still there has been no change or improvement!
So the decline continued. Although the elders and those helping them
still stood firm and were zealous in their efforts to restore community
through earnest warning, admonition, and discipline, and by using
exclusion and the ban, they were too weak to stop the terrible decay and
ravages of evil. For where people were inflated with their own selfimportance and had no fear of God in their hearts, they refused to accept
church discipline. They preferred to forsake the church and their faith, and
they went away. This too is seen from the old writings.
In the teaching on Acts 2 the reasons for the church's decay and final
ruin are plainly spelled out. Those with zealous, faithful hearts could see
beforehand that disaster was approaching. I therefore include a report on
it, for there is no account anywhere else.
Commenting on the words, And the Lord added to the church daily
those who were being saved, (Acts 2:47) a servant of the Word raised a
bitter and sorrowful lament. He quoted a passage from Proverbs 30 and
said: (Proverbs 30:14)
There are far too many whose fangs are like swords and who devour
with their teeth. For just as a wolf, a wild boar, a lion, a dog, and other
such animals have long fangs for tearing the lamb until it lies still and
they can devour it with their teeth, so there are people who when they fly
into a temper so yell and rage that poor, needy, simple-hearted people are
completely overcome by their angry shouting. They find their trust to God
eaten away and their faith so weakened that they are unable to praise,
thank, or worship him. So they, too, become a hindrance to God's honor.
When the quarrelers have had enough of arguing, slandering, and
insulting, they go off without any sense of guilt and wait for more whom
they can strangle and murder. Such people are without God. He has

rejected them and given them over to the Devil, and it is right to loathe
them with all our hearts and cut them off. Their conduct is now so
common that a faithful believer might well say [to God] as David does,
'My flesh trembles and my hair stands on end for fear of you, and I am
afraid of your judgments,' when such shameful people, in bondage to hell,
count themselves as brothers and sisters. In reality they belong to Lucifer,
Belzebub, Asmodeas, and Satan rather than to Jesus Christ, the lover of
peace.
O Lord God Almighty, grant that we may once more know a time
when you daily add to your church those who are being saved, so that our
hearts may rejoice in it! How old and how barren has grown Sarah,
Abraham's wife, your church, who ought to have children, to bear children
for eternal life, that your praise may be proclaimed on earth.
For now, to speak truthfully, we must say, 'Every day Satan carries off
from the church those who deserve damnation, whose hearts are set on this
world, on full bellies and temporal riches and honor and who must
therefore live for eternity in hell and not in Heaven.' This should make us
weep and lament in bitter grief!
Yet while this is happening, dear brothers, while everybody sees and
hears these things, there is a terrible indifference, a joyless life together,
and never-ending complaints and accusations. All the people do is
grumble, but no one will take any blame. Even those who are clearly in the
wrong, who have been won over by Satan and proved faithless, excuse
themselves by saying, 'Oh, I would never have gone away; the thought
would never have entered my head! I don't know of a single thing I did
wrong, and I always gave of my best ever since I was a young child. It's
the head of my work department, the steward, the servant of the Word,
who are to blame. They slighted me, demanded more of me than I could
manage, and disciplined me when I wasn't to blame at all. That is what
makes me leave. At the Last Judgment I will cry for vengeance on them.'
Now these ungodly people probably have parents, children, and
friends who join in, unjustly blaming the servant of the Word, steward, or
witness brother. And this multiplies not only the ugly suspicions, mistrust,
and sour looks, but also the scandalous gossip, envy, hate, and untrue,

completely unfounded accusations. The ones who are attached in this way
defend themselves by saying, 'Before God and all the angels, they are
being unjust to me. My only concern was for God's honor, for their
salvation, and the good of the church. Well, if it is going to be like this,
and if this is my reward, I will hold my tongue in the future and say
nothing. I will serve God quietly in my own corner and not concern myself
for others. God will not count it against me' ... and so on.
In this way the zealous brother or sister is worn down and his fervor
quenched. His opponent has triumphed and goes off like a hero, without
any qualm of conscience. So the one drags the other down and the calf
follows the cow into disaster.
This is what is happening. Everybody knows it and no one
understands why. For not a single person will admit his own faults. Doesn't
it seem strange to you that we recognize how much harm is done to the
church and how the community gets smaller and smaller and yet there is
so much evil among the few who are left? May God preserve his honor and
his heritage, for we could say with truth, 'The Lord our God has daily
reason to turn his eyes away and let the rams that choose their own pasture
and the vain creatures that follow their own fleshly desires fall prey to the
bear and wolf from hell, to the cunning hunter who tears them away from
the church.'
He diminishes the number of the faithful every day and adds to the
kingdom of hell, in a few years reducing ten or twelve thousand to a
remnant of less than a thousand.
And there is something even more lamentable, for while no one
should grieve when a faithful and God-fearing man is cut off by earthly
death, yet many now die with stains on their consciences; they have
become thieves, liars, slanderers, and impure people; many hundred have
even been unfaithful. These evil examples should be taken as warning and
should awaken zeal for God's honor and for the church's good. But the
exact opposite happens.
Satan, preaching fleshly lusts, has appealed to their carnal nature and
his teaching was like tinder to start a fire. He made them so slothful in

divine service that God the Lord wearied, lost all pleasure in them, and
spat them out. For they follow their earthly natures, filling their bellies
like swine, giving themselves over to vanity, arrogance, greed, and
licentiousness.
They persist in these things, completely unmoved by wonder fully
clear teachings and warnings, until unbelief has taken complete hold of
them and they fear neither devil nor hell anymore.
Oh, who would not be beside themselves with grief and protest
against the horrible violence of the devil who daily matches away so much
of God's church and his glorious light?
Dear brothers, no one should wonder why there is so much
grumbling, mistrust, and suspicion, why love grows cold, and peace,
obedience, and childlike trust have vanished from among God's
people, and why the fear of complete collapse weighs heavily
on everyone's heart. The trembling of a leaf or a mere threat from
unbelievers makes people lose courage, take what belongs to the church
and hoard it for themselves. If the much-feared persecution does not come,
they cannot face giving back what they have taken. Even on their
deathbeds, they shrink from the shame and humiliation. Children and
friends are supposed to return it. When these hear about it, however, they
adopt the same attitude. They say, 'Dear father, dear mother, dear husband,
my fears are the same as yours. God let these goods come into my hands
and I am going to keep them. Many thanks for them'. And so it goes on
one way or another. Every day Satan carries from the church souls that will
have to face damnation.
Do you want to know who is to blame? Is God the Lord to blame? Is
the servant of the Word or someone else to blame? No, no, no! Not the
servant of the Word, unless a sin is proved against him. The grace of God
is offered daily. His grace daily reaches out to them, calls and cries to
them. Many accept it, but do not hold to it long; they become careless,
weary, and slothful and let it go. The seed withers and perishes, for it has

fallen on stony ground. The sun burns it up. The people hear but do not do
what is said. The devil carries the seed away.
***************

Lost records
At the time of which we speak, the church was entrusted to brother
Andreas Ehrenpreis, and after him to brother Johannes Rücker, as has
already been mentioned. They were faithful, zealous, God-fearing, and
highly gifted men. Brother Andreas Ehrenpreis in particular was a noted
Elder of the whole church, as can be seen from his songs and writings. It
was during his time as Elder that these writings and complaints were
made. Although much that was deeply disturbing and wrong was already
taking place, he and Johannes Rücker and their helpers still kept firmly to
Christian community and a right order in other church matters. They still
held the people together and were not deterred when many ungodly people
became unfaithful and went away.
No report of Johannes Rücker's death is to be found. We do not know
who followed in his place.
On an old sheet of paper there is this report:
1687: August 20, at Sabatisch, brother Caspar Eglauch as
representative of all the elders entrusted the church to the care of Johannes
Milder.
***************

1688 End of community of goods/probable date & cause
On March 28, at four o'clock in the afternoon, brother Johannes
Milder fell asleep in the Lord at Sabatisch.

On May 5, 1688, brother Caspar Eglauch was elected, Elder and was
entrusted with the care of the church by brother. Dietrich Freyschlag, who
represented the elders because brother Tobias Bersch, the only servant of
the Word, had completely, lost his sight and therefore could not read. The
meeting was held at Sabatisch.
We still have valuable old books with dates and initials that show
they were handwritten by brother Caspar Eglauch, brother Tobias Bersch,
and Tobias Breunel. It can also be seen that community of goods was still
practiced in their time, for they stress this practice in their writings. They
insist on it as fundamental to their teaching, essential to the salvation of
God's children, and they sternly discipline any who offend against it.
Even after the practice was given up, servants of the Word continued
to teach community of goods. These teachings helped toward a later
renewal of communal life.
The practice must have stopped very soon afterwards, however, and
each one established himself in private property, as those who call
themselves brothers and Christians do everywhere else. In spite of this,
they prided themselves on the faith and religion of their forefathers, they
kept to adult baptism, to the Lord's Supper as a meal in remembrance of
Christ's death and resurrection, and to other customs and outward
ceremonies. They still held some property in common which was used for
the support of the old and poor and for other necessities. They still used
the ban and exclusion for any who were disobedient or immoral. The
servants of the Word were given a fixed income in money, grain and wood.
As regards anything else to do with godly living and sincere
Christianity, they had fallen away and lost ground so badly that they were
scarcely different from people in the world and had nothing left but the
name and high reputation of their ancestors.
We cannot say in which year community of goods was abandoned nor
what the immediate cause may have been - whether it was under the stress
of war, famine, or persecution, for we have neither verbal nor written
reports up to this date of writing, 1793.

It is highly probable that disunity, quarreling, and strife went on
growing until there was an open break. Dear brother Andreas Ehrenpreis
had been afraid that this would happen, as he said in his last words to the
church. Several circumstances make us conclude that community of goods
came to an end about the year 1693 or 1694. But the date cannot be fixed
conclusively.
I ask anyone who finds out about this to write an account on these
empty pages.
A little information has been gleaned by talking to old people who
once lived in community of goods. One or the other still remembered
enough to tell where the common kitchen and this or that workroom had
been. Pieces of equipment were still about that were said to come from the
days when there was a common life.
The descendants of the church community founded by Jakob Hutter
had become unfaithful in many ways and were not living steadfastly in the
light of divine truth. Therefore, in the end, God withdrew his light and
grace and plunged them in darkness. They fell from one wrong into the
next, until in the course of time they lost their name, too, and had no way
out but to accept the popish religion, as we will recount in the appropriate
place.
***************

1725 How infant baptism was introduced at VelkÈ Lev·re
In 1725, child baptism was introduced at Velké Leváre. This was how
it happened. On March 6, two Jesuits came to the lord's castle, Velké
Leváre. They asked for the Elder, whose name was Jakob Polman. When
he came to them they soon began disputing with him on questions of faith.
The Elder held his ground, however, and answered their points, so that this
time nothing happened to him, and they went away.

The following day they returned, bringing other priests, judges, and
jurors with them. They again made every attempt to force the brothers to
deny their faith, and finding no success, they wrote down the names of all
the people, both men and women. For a few days nothing happened, but on
March 10 the Jesuit sent a message to the community that several brothers
should come to him since he had something important to tell them. The
brothers went to him in his room. With many smooth and hypocritical
words, he proceeded to present his demands: they were to attend church
and to have their little children baptized. The brothers replied that they
could not do this, for it was against their faith and divine truth.
After a short delay, the godless Jesuit took the matter up again on
March 13. He sent for Jakob Polman, intending to imprison him. But the
brothers at Velké Leváre realized it would be dangerous to obey the
summons. They consulted together and agreed to go in their Elder's place.
The Elder slipped away to Sabatisch and the whole community took his
place in front of the Jesuit and the nobles. This infuriated the Jesuit, who
at once had sixteen brothers chained hand and foot and locked into a dark
cellar. Then he gave a lying report of the incident to the Bishop of Vienna,
who was the actual lord of the manor for Velké Leváre. He slandered the
church, declaring that the brothers had tried to storm the castle and had
forced him from two rooms into a third. The bishop was very angry about
it.
The church took up the brothers' cause and made every effort to have
them released. Two brothers rode to Modern and Pressburg to their old
protector, Count Adam, and complained to him of the injustice done to
them. The count advised them to pluck up courage and go to their real
manorial lord, Kollonitsch, who was a bishop at the imperial court in
Vienna at the time. They followed this advice and arranged that the young
servant of the Word, Johannes Mayer, and two other brothers should go.
The three traveled to Vienna to complain of the unjust treatment they had
received in contradiction to the privileges previously granted, and they
begged the bishop to release their brothers.
The bishop refused to give them audience for he was extremely angry
with them. They had to return home with nothing accomplished. To make

matters worse, the bishop believed the Jesuit and gave him permission to
punish the brothers for their violence.
As a result, the whole community was driven out of Velké Leváre. A
godless rabble came by night, seized the place and began breaking down
the doors and stealing whatever they liked. The carried the booty back to
the castle. The people at Velké Leváre had to leave the place empty and
move over to St. Johannes and Sabatisch.
The Jesuit refused to release the imprisoned brothers unless the whole
congregation signed an agreement to attend church and have their small
children baptized. In the end the people signed, and the brothers were set
free. That is how easily they gave up true Christian baptism, signing
against their own hearts and consciences because they were not willing to
suffer for God and his truth.
When everything was over, the bishop at Vienna learned the
brotherhood had been driven from Velké Leváre, and the place was
standing empty. He was greatly displeased, for he had never expected such
a violent course of action. Perhaps in the meantime he had discovered that
the brothers had been falsely accused. The Jesuit and his assistants were
now in fear and trembling; they had got themselves into serious trouble
and did not know how to get out of it. They therefore came to Sabatisch
and St. Johannes to beg the brothers from Velké Leváre to return home and
forget all the injuries done to them. The brothers complied and went back
to Velké Leváre after five weeks at Sabatisch and St. Johannes. Their
manorial lord, Kollonitsch, bishop of Vienna, restored their earlier
privileges. They could hold meetings in their own meetinghouse, and their
own ministers could preach to them. But they must let their children be
baptized, for they had all signed an agreement to this. The Elder Jakob
Polman did not return to Velké Leváre. He remained in Sabatisch.
It was said that this trouble was stirred up against us by an unfaithful
brother, Helemeyer, who had once lived at Velké Leváre but who had been
excluded by the church for his godless behavior. He had then adopted the
Roman Catholic faith and from the malice of his heart had contrived to
injure the church. Soon afterwards, however, he met his end, for God in his
wrath visited him with sudden death.

***************

1725 How infant baptism began at Sabatisch
After the enemies of divine truth had been successful in one
community, they let several years go by before doing anything further. As
soon as they thought a favorable moment had come, they directed their
attack to Sabatisch. Two Jesuits, the town pastor, and several of the landed
gentry arrived at the Sabatisch community, summoned the church Elder
and his helpers to appear before them, and asked whether or not the people
in the community at Velké Leváre were their brothers and fellow believers.
They replied, Yes, they are our brothers. At this they were asked, How is it
that they have their children baptized and you refuse? The Elder told them
that this had never been done at Velké Leváre in earlier times and that the
brothers there did it neither of their own free will, nor from any belief it
was right, but because they had been forced into submission.
This explanation was not accepted. The Elder and his helpers were
held to their words that the people at Velké Leváre were their brothers: if
their brothers let their children be baptized, then those at Sabatisch should
permit this, too. Although the brothers did not consent, although they
argued and protested against it, the Jesuits and their companions kept
insisting that they must allow their children to be baptized.
When the Elder and his helpers continued to resist, they were all three
imprisoned in Count Niari's castle, since he was one of their manorial
lords. After they had been in prison for some time, a number of lords from
the church and state came once more, summoned Jakob Polman to appear
before them by himself and pressed him until at last he consented to have
the children at Sabatisch baptized, too. He was then released.
The other two were not even summoned to appear; a guard simply
opened the prison door for them and told them they could leave and go
home.

Heinrich Amssler said to the guard, I would first like to know the
conditions for my release. The guard retorted, What has that to do with
me? If you don't want to go out, you can stay in, and he went away. The
two brothers therefore returned home. Afterwards the Elder was deeply
sorry for what he had done. When the local priest came for the first time to
baptize a baby, Jakob Polman saw him through the window and cried out,
Oh, woe is me! What have I done?
It is also said that when the local priest heard of a newborn baby at
Sabatisch, he drew up in front of the house in an enclosed wagon and
asked for the infant to be brought out to him so that he might take it to the
church and baptize it according to Roman Catholic rites. When the parents
refused, he took the baby by force. A big disturbance followed. The sisters
(as they still called themselves) rushed up and attacked the pastor, seized
the child back, and mishandled the priest disgracefully. They tore his
cassock and pushed him into the nearby brook, struck at him with their
work aprons, and (according to the reports) sat on his face to stop his
mouth, and behaved in other unseemly ways toward him. On this occasion
the priest finally went away without the baby. After a time he came again,
better prepared, took the baby to the church with him and baptized it.
From that time on (1733) all the babies were baptized, also those from St.
Johannes and Trentschin.
The brothers and sisters certainly sighed and lamented about it and
were extremely unhappy that such a wrong practice had been allowed
among them. But because they had not fought resolutely enough for the
divine truth, and had long given up first one part of it and then another
uncoerced, God allowed his vineyard to become desolate, since it was
producing nothing but sour grapes, and thorns, and thistles.
In great grief, they immediately wrote to the church at Alwinz in
Transylvania telling of the disaster that had struck them. Brother Joseph
Kuhr can still remember it very well. He was a boy of twelve when this
sad news reached Alwinz from Sabatisch.
When the children baptized as infants were old enough to understand,
they were baptized on confession of their faith. The baptism was in a
private room, however, and no longer in public, in front of the

congregation in their church. This continued until the last persecution
swept over them.
***************

1666 Georg Geiss faithless shepherd steal goods and forsakes
community
The last entry about the church in Transylvania was for 1662. In
August of that year the community returned home from the castle. The
Turkish pasha gave them a pass to protect them from wandering bands. As
we have no written reports of subsequent happenings, I will give a short
account based on what is commonly told of them, especially by our older
people.
It appears that the community at Alwinz then enjoyed twenty or more
years of peace until the outbreak of the Kuruc War, or War of Rebellion,
which began in 1687 and took the following course:
Up to this time the principality of Transylvania had been under the
Turkish sultan, who had appointed its princes. Now, after spying out the
ground, the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph I sent an army led by his field
marshal, General Rabutin, to bring the country under his control. Rabutin
was opposed by the descendants of Prince Ráköczi, the foremost of whom
bore the same name. When Field Marshal Rabutin had taken and occupied
Engeten, Ráköczi and his confederates planned a surprise attack on the
imperial army. They agreed that each with his forces would meet at
Engeten at a prearranged hour in the night to launch the assault. But his
two allies played Prince Ráköczi false. They did not come at the appointed
time. Now, this Ráköczi, no less than his predecessor, was a gallant and
dauntless warrior. Relying on his own strength and valor, he and his little
band attacked the foe. They killed many of the imperial soldiers and broke
through to where the heavy artillery was mounted. But he could not hold
the field to win a complete victory. The tide turned against him, for a great
number of his men were mown down by cannonballs when Field Marshal

Rabutin ordered his men to open fire on them with the heavy guns. The
survivors had to flee.
After his defeat Rákóczi and his remaining followers (known as
Kurucs) found refuge in the woods and mountains. For several years they
roved the countryside, raiding and robbing like brigands, and doing a great
deal of harm to the local people. Finally, in 1706, the country was brought
under the control of the Holy Roman Emperor and was freed from the
raiders.
That was the so-called Kuruc War, begun in 1687. The people in
Transylvania were full of stories and memories of it. The community at
Alwinz, like everyone else in the country, had to endure anxiety, terror, and
pillage during the war years. Under such great pressures, the structure of
Christian community fell apart and ceased to exist. Brother Joseph Kuhr
often told me of the way it happened, for he had heard the account from
his father.
On the other side of the River Maros, a fortress or castle stood on a
hill. The community had taken their best and most valuable belongings to
the castle for safe-keeping. Nearly all the people had fled there, too, and
encamped within the walls. The elder of the church at that time was Georg
Geiss. (He had formerly been an Arian [anti-trinitarian] but became a
brother, after some years a servant of the Word and finally Elder.) The
people had been refugees in the castle for several years when this Georg
Geiss loaded six or seven wagons with the best of the community's
property and took it to Klausenburg (where he originally came from). So
he proved a great scoundrel and a false, faithless shepherd for the Lord's
poor little lambs. He forsook the church, his faith, and his God. It is said
that his death was terrible, for as he lay dying his conscience filled him
with fear at the memory of his theft. Apparently he wished over and over
that he could speak with a brother, but what he wanted to speak about is
not known or recorded. And so he died in terror.
The community was seriously weakened by his treachery, and as the
war went on longer and longer and peace never came, everyone was forced
to fend for himself however and wherever he could.

***************

1706 How community of goods came to an end
It is true that brother Michel Wipf was chosen Elder in place of
Georg Geiss, but he must have been weak and lax in his leadership, for he
did not bring the church back to its previous way of life. After the war
ended everyone settled down with his own private property and
possessions, as had been done at Sabatisch and the other places in
Hungary.
Infant baptism was not practiced at Alwinz in Transylvania. The
bishop pressed hard for it, but the clergy in Transylvania did not have as
much authority as in Hungary, and the provincial gentry did not wish to
undermine the brotherhood's long-standing privileges, so would not allow
any infringement of them. Yet the brothers at Alwinz remained united with
the congregations in Hungary and did not separate from them as they
should have done.
***************

1738 Alwinz community struck by plague
About the year 1738 another terrible epidemic of plague ravaged
Transylvania, killing many inhabitants. It swept through the community at
Alwinz, too. Brother Joseph Kuhr lay sick struck with the pestilence for
six weeks, and although he himself survived, he lost his brother and his
first wife from the disease. The overwhelming grief and wretchedness he
describes can scarcely be believed by any who did not live through it.
The pestilence first broke out among the townspeople. Houses where
someone had died, or only lay sick, were locked and barred. Any sick
person inside had to lie helpless and perish miserably. Many fled into the

woods, believing this would save them from infection, but God's hand,
stretched out in punishment, found them wherever they were, and flight
was useless. Countless people died in the woods just as they did in the
towns and villages. Many were not even buried but were devoured by dogs
and wild animals. Afterwards the dogs dragged the bones about the streets.
Ties of family or friendship meant nothing anymore. Not a soul cared for
any other. Everyone was terrified he would catch the disease. That is how
dark and wretched a time it was.
The infection spread to the community and all who died of this
pestilence died in the same month. The bodies of the dead were laid in
coffins and given orderly burial in the earth as had always been the
custom; the people remained together and did not desert one another. They
helped and cared for their sick. In fact they made a solemn agreement, as
they stood by the graveside at one of the burials, that not one of them
would desert the other as long as two remained alive. If one of the two
were to die, the survivor would bury the dead, then dig his own grave;
when he felt himself sicken he would lie down in the grave to await his
end. They made this agreement so that they would not suffer the same fate
as their neighbors. But they were never brought to this, for after fiftyseven people had died the epidemic ceased, leaving thirty-six people alive.
Brother Joseph Kuhr told of his own brother, who died of the plague
as was mentioned earlier. As he lay sick and felt that his end was near, he
took leave of his brother and of the whole community in a wonderful and
heartfelt way. He comforted and encouraged those gathered around him,
telling them they must remain firm and keep together. God would not
leave them. After my death ten more will die and then the deaths will
cease. Then he said, I see the heavens open, and an angel of God has come
down to me. He has passed his hand over my body and I have no more
pain. With this he turned over and fell asleep in death. Ten people died
after him; then the deaths stopped.
During this time of grief, the church at Alwinz had two servants of
the Word. One was called Joseph Wipf, the other Andreas Zillich. Brother
Joseph Wipf died at the very beginning of the outbreak of plague. Brother
Andreas Zillich survived, but he lived only a year or two longer and then

passed away. So the community at Alwinz was left without a servant of the
Word. They therefore sent two or three brothers to Sabatisch, told the
community there of the need in Transylvania, and asked for a servant of
the Word. In response, brother Martl Roth was appointed for the church at
Alwinz and accompanied the brothers on their return to Transylvania. He
was the only servant of the Word in Alwinz for four or five years.
In 1747, brother Zacharias Walter, at that time the Elder at Sabatisch
in Hungary, arranged a meeting to discuss the economic affairs of the
communities. Brothers from Velké Leváre, Trentschin, and St. Johannes
were asked to attend. A letter was sent to the Alwinz community to inform
them of the meeting and said that if they had any special needs they should
attend. The brotherhood at Alwinz agreed they were in need of another
servant of the Word, for brother Martl Roth was of a rather weak and
yielding nature. Martl Roth, Joseph Kuhr, and Careth Gentner were
therefore sent to the meeting. The assembled brothers elected Joseph Kuhr
to the service of the Word, and on August 15 in this same year 1747 he was
appointed in the presence of the whole church at Sabatisch for a time of
testing.
After his appointment Martl Roth and the two brothers returned to
Transylvania. In Alwinz, Transylvania, on October 12 of the following
year, 1748, brother Joseph Kuhr was confirmed in the service of the Word
with laying on of hands by the elders.
***************

1734 God no longer wished this people to call themselves by
this name
I return to the church in Hungary. I have already said that brother
Jakob Polman was Elder at Sabatisch. After his death Jörg Franckh was
appointed, but as he came into ill repute on account of his wife, he was
excluded and his appointment was removed. Brother Zacharias Walter
replaced him. He was the last Elder. Brother Tobias Polman and Heinrich

Kuhn supported him in the service. Brother Heinrich Müller was Elder at
Velké Leváre with Heinrich Polman as his helper. There were no servants
of the Word at St. Johannes and Trentschin, but one or another from
Sabatisch or Velké Leváre went over to give the teaching.
It is clear that the church community in Hungary and Transylvania
had deteriorated both inwardly and outwardly and was coming almost to
an end. Now follows a short account of its total destruction.
As the previous pages make amply clear, the church had fallen very
far and forsaken the divine truth in many ways. Finally God no longer
wished this people to call themselves by the name their forefathers had
made honorable. He took name and honor away and ended all their claims.
For God the Lord allowed persecution to fall on them. Undoubtedly this
was to test their supposed faith, so that it could be seen whether they held
firmly to God and the divine truth. They did not prove favorable to the
test, but were like chaff, unable to withstand the wind of trouble. Although
many of them held out for a time, in the end they weakened, gave way, and
were defeated. The persecution began as follows:
***************

1759 Final persecution began
In 1759, when Maria Theresa was Holy Roman Empress, the clergy
(meaning the Jesuit priests and others of their breed) persistently
requested her permission to destroy the brotherhood, which they still
scornfully called an Anabaptist sect, and to force Roman Catholicism on
its members.
Now this Maria Theresa was an arch-Catholic who doted on priests.
As she favored them so highly, she could not easily refuse them anything.
It was a simple matter for them to obtain freedom and authority to wreak
their will on the church.

Once allowed power, the clergy immediately called on the lay
authorities to help them, particularly on the manorial lords at Sabatisch.
Other leading men in the country were also anxious to win high standing
with the empress and loyally rallied to give help.
***************

1759 Books confiscated
The Jesuits, who headed the undertaking, met with the parish priests
from Sabatisch, Velké Leváre, and Trentschin, and with the manorial lords
of the county to consider the most convenient and efficient method of
putting their plan into action. They decided that it would be best to make
surprise raids on all four places on the same day to confiscate their books.
The date set was November 25.
Out of sympathy and compassion a nobleman from the district
disclosed the plan to the Trentschin brotherhood. They at once sent a
messenger to the other communities so that they might hide the books.
On the appointed day the Jesuits and landed gentry of the county
arrived, with Hungarian guards, soldiers, and a crowd of others. They
raided all four places simultaneously with ruthless violence. Guards were
stationed at the house doors so that no one could go in or out. Then all the
members were called together and a harsh imperial mandate was read out
to them. The decree contained more or less the following: Whereas, it is
Her Imperial Majesty's will and command, and whereas, the books of the
Anabaptist sect teach out-and-out heresy and damnable error, therefore the
said books are to be collected up and destroyed. Whosoever shall refuse to
give these books up must expect the most serious consequences.
The brothers were not intimidated by the threats but told the
authorities they could not and would not comply. It would be tantamount
to giving up their faith. But if the authorities intended to use force, the
brothers would not resist them. The authorities then ordered the books to
be seized. The godless mob broke into the houses, searched every secret

corner and hiding place, and took all the books they could find. They
packed and sealed them in chests, which were put in the charge of the
county government. Although the brothers had hidden the best of the
books, many were found and carried off, for there had been a tremendous
number, as can well be imagined when one recalls how large the
community had been a century earlier.
It could grieve one to the heart to think how many beautiful writings
and books were lost when the communities were despoiled and destroyed books that had been written with so much patient toil by the dear brothers
of earlier days for the use and profit of those living after them. And now
they were brought to such an end by the godless rabble, burned up or used
for any and every unfitting purpose.
***************

1760 Persecution continues
After the raid the godless people remained quiet for a time, through
the winter until spring of the following year, 1760. In March, on St.
Joseph's Day [March 19], the county officials again appeared at Sabatisch.
With them came Count Niáry, who was one of the brothers' lords of the
manor, and a crowd of his supporters who made a surprise attack at
evening when the community was gathered in the church. They were a
terrifying sight as they advanced with horses and wagons, Hungarian
guards, and other men-at-arms, all with weapons drawn, acting as if they
wanted to strike us down and murder us. It was such a terrible shock to the
brothers and sisters, that one very stout sister fell unconscious and died.
The godless attackers yelled abuse and blasphemies, and the brothers and
sisters had to listen and do nothing, for God had allowed the attack and
given their enemies power over them.
When things had quieted down a little, the magistrates read out an
imperial mandate informing the community that on her imperial majesty's
orders they were to abandon their faith and sect (as it was termed). To put

it shortly, they were to attend a Roman Catholic church and conform to its
religion. Subsequently each one had to make an oral statement whether he
would obey or not. From all one can discover, no one consented on that
occasion, but each one stated that his faith was the true Christian faith, and
that he intended to continue in it. Each reply was written down, which took
a long time. In the meantime the guards employed by the county
authorities stood, with weapons drawn, watching the church doors so that
no one could go in or out to consult with the others. When the hearing was
over, the godless crowd went away, taking the written answers with them
to the county government. The magistrates saw that they were not getting
anywhere with the brothers and that these people would not give up their
faith so easily. They therefore held another meeting to discuss how they
should proceed.
Not long afterward the lords came again, bringing the deputy
governor and other landed gentry with them. The people were again called
together and again an imperial mandate was read out to them. The
mandate said that on her imperial majesty's stern command the Anabaptist
sect should not be tolerated in the country. It should be rooted out
immediately. Her imperial majesty would be willing to show mercy,
however, if the members would acknowledge four articles of faith as right.
First, that infant baptism is the true Christian baptism. Second, that the
flesh and blood of Christ, his actual body as he hung upon the cross, are
truly present in the solemn and holy sacrament. Third, that magistrates are
Christian. Fourth, that it is permissible to swear oaths. On these conditions
they would be tolerated in the country and be granted imperial favor and
protection.
The assembled brothers answered unanimously that they could never
consent. They proved on the basis of Holy Scripture that these four articles
are opposed to the Word and truth of God. We cannot know exactly what
they said, for thirty years persecution have passed since then, and few
people are still living who remember what took place. When the brothers
had given their answer, the lords responded, My dear people, if you will
not obey when we speak in a pleasant and friendly way, we must try torture
on you, and in the end you will have to do what we want. You will only
suffer for it. All the disadvantage will be on your side, for you will have to

pay for our meals when we hold a county magistrates' meeting to deal with
your case. With that they left the place.
When the enemies of divine truth saw that the brothers would not
easily be converted, they turned to sterner measures. The lords returned
with an imperial decree and brought a cunning Jesuit along with them.
They drove the people into the prayer room and informed them that the
Jesuit in front of them had been appointed by the empress to be their
preacher. They were to listen to him, do as he said, and let themselves be
instructed by him. The community's preachers were forbidden to teach or
to preach to the people any longer. The Jesuit then went to the preacher's
place and began his sermon with all the lords present. The community had
to look on and hear it all. Guards stood at the door, allowing no one out.
The Jesuit took infant baptism as his theme and tried to prove from Holy
Scripture that it was right. He began by pretending to be humble, wiping
his eyes with a little cloth as if he were weeping and saying, I cannot speak
from grief of heart. He wrung his hands and cried, O almighty God, have
mercy on these poor people who have been so shamefully misled that they
refuse to practice the baptism shown to us by Christ and his apostles, and
who use a different baptism which comes from the devil and his brood! He
spoke many other blasphemies as well.
Such talking exasperated many of the brothers, and one named
Abraham Tschetter could endure it no longer. He interrupted the Jesuit in
front of the whole congregation and all the landed gentry, saying, O you
blind, benighted man, you are so wrong one can only pity you! You say the
baptism commanded by Christ and practiced by the apostles is baptism
from the devil. And you say a baptism instituted according to the Roman
pope's or some old church doctor's opinion is to be held up as Christian
baptism although not one word about it can be found in Scripture. It's
pitiable!
The sheriff ordered him to be silent, threatened him in very strong
terms, and made a note of his name. He was promptly arrested, taken to
the town of Erlau fifty miles [80 km] from the community, and put in a
Jesuit cloister. There he remained for some time until he gave up his faith
and became a Roman Catholic.

At first this brother was full of zeal and courage to fight: on the side
of divine truth, and it certainly is very sad that he did not persevere to the
last. We feel the same sadness for all who were beaten, chained, and
imprisoned, who went through great suffering and yet did not remain
steadfast to the end.
The magistrates now appointed two Jesuits as preachers for the
communities, one at Sabatisch, the other at Velké Leváre. The empress had
given strict orders for this measure to be enforced. Those who did not
attend the Jesuits' sermons and instruction in the Roman Catholic church
were to be reported to the county government. The magistrates were to
imprison then immediately, and to lock and seal the prayer house doors.
Now, severe and menacing as the orders were, the people still did not
attend the preaching in the Roman Catholic church. The Jesuits informed
the authorities.
Once more a large number of lay and ecclesiastical lords gathered on
the Bruderhof at Velké Leváre. There were the country governor and
sheriff, the administrator and county gentry, two rural deans, and the
parish priests from Sabatisch, Velké Leváre and other places - a great
crowd of people. All the brothers 1760 were assembled outside in the yard.
Once more strong efforts were made to persuade them to attend the Roman
Catholic church and to listen to Jesuit sermons. The brothers absolutely
refused, and much was said from both sides.
The officials stayed the whole day, gorging and getting drunk and
enjoying it all at the community's expense. They consumed eighty florins'
worth of food and drink on the one day, and that very evening the
community had to lay the money for it on the table while the gentry were
there. Such visits were frequently repeated. In Sabatisch, too, almost all
the common resources were used up for this purpose. The communities
could not keep supplying such sums for long. The lords then confiscated a
field or meadow instead and handed it over to some nobleman at half the
real value. As a result of this injustice the church became extremely poor.
When the Elder at Velké Leváre, Heinrich Müller, saw that the
situation was growing worse and worse and that our persecutors intended
to go to all lengths against us, he consulted with his people whether or not

it would be advisable to flee and so prevent the church losing all the
servants of the Word. As their shepherd, he did not want to leave the flock;
if he could only keep them from harm, he would rather suffer all their
troubles with them. He was ready to accept whatever they all recognized
as best. Most of the brothers felt that they should remain where they were
and patiently await whatever God permitted to happen to them.
Next the authorities provided the Jesuits with an armed escort, which
went from house to house, drove the people into the church, and kept strict
watch at the door to prevent anyone getting out. The soldiers struck
anyone who protested and refused to attend.
Shortly afterwards the mob came to Velké Leváre and Sabatisch
again, bringing an armed escort, peasants with their many wagons, and
others besides. No one knew why they had come. The community was
called together and the lords began as before by urging their demands in
the strongest way. The brothers refused them all, for they saw that if once
they attended the church, still more would be demanded.
***************

1761 Total collapse of the Sabatisch & VelkÈ Lev·re church
The lords then ordered their men to use force. The soldiers hardly
waited for the command; in their eagerness to get their hands on the
brothers, they bound the servants of the Word and threw them in the
wagons first, then most of the older brothers after them. If a brother
contradicted them by speaking the truth, the immediate reaction was,
That's another stubborn one. Out with him! and he was bound and carried
off to prison in one of the neighboring towns. Brother Zacharias Walter,
the Elder from Sabatisch, was taken to a Jesuit monastery at Ofen, brother
Heinrich Müller to a monastery at Gran, in Hungary. It is not possible to
discover where the other three, Tobias Polman and Heinrich Kuhn from
Sabatisch and Heinrich Polman from Velké Leváre were imprisoned. This
took place in the year 1761 on the Saturday before Easter. *

The brothers who were not taken away as prisoners on this occasion
took flight and moved from one place to another, in the woods for that
summer and the whole of the following winter, suffering great misery and
want. They left their wives and children behind in their homes and
sometimes visited them secretly at night to fetch a little food. By day they
did not dare to show themselves. All the workshops were empty and the
community's whole economy collapsed. No one could get out of the
country for there were spies on all the roads to catch and bring fugitives
back. Anyone who was caught was arrested at once and handed over to the
magistrates. If he would not promise to attend church, he was thrown into
prison. The brothers; could expect only trouble and suffering.
The brothers from Sabatisch made their way over to the extensive
forests in the neighborhood of Velké Leváre. They could not stay hidden
long however, for the intense cold made it impossible to survive without a
fire. The smoke betrayed their whereabouts in the woods, and they were
spied out by hunters who informed the magistrates about them.
The officials came with hunters, armed followers, and a great crowd
of peasants, and encircled the wood. Dealing harsh blows to some of the
brothers, they captured more than fifty of them, bound their hands behind
their backs, and threw them on to wagons or sleds. Humbly and patiently
the brothers begged the officials to consider what they were doing in
treating them with such ruthless violence. The greatest scoundrels found
shelter in villages and towns while the believers, who had never wished to
harm anyone, had no place to stay, even in the woods with the wild beasts.
They had always tried their utmost to do what was right and not to cause
offense. They had faithfully paid the empress and manorial lords all their
dues, taxes, and tolls.
The officials replied, We know all this quite well. We have no better
tenants on our estates than you brothers. But as the empress refuses to
tolerate you, we cannot afford to fall under her majesty's displeasure on
your account. So the order was given for the brothers to be bound and
taken to prison, but first of all they were searched and everything that was
found was taken from them. The rope to tie the brothers up was bought at
the community's expense and cost fifteen gulden.

A few days earlier the brothers had sent three of their number across
the River March into Austria to buy bread. These were on the way back
with the bread and had reached the river, when in the distance they heard
the loud screams and groans of their brothers who had been captured,
bound, and cruelly beaten by their godless attackers. They were greatly
distressed, wept bitterly, and lamented their misery to God in heaven.
Afterward they wandered most of the night in the woods, freezing cold in
the deep snow, their eyes wet with tears as they called on God to give them
endurance.
They met one or two brothers who had escaped capture when their
enemies were hunting them in the woods. Together they decided to return
to Sabatisch, making their way through the woods because they did not
dare to be seen on the roads by day. They came back to their wives and
children and told them that many brothers had been taken prisoner. The
people at Sabatisch then described what misery and heartbreak they, too,
were suffering. Very few brothers were left, since most of them were in
prison. Their manorial lords had plundered all the houses and taken away
every piece of bed linen and household equipment that could be found.
Because of this the sisters and children had moved together in a few
houses and abandoned their other possessions.
Subsequently, twelve Hungarian guards and two commissars were
stationed with them. They gorged and overdrank from the communal
stores at Sabatisch, and plundered and wreaked their will. In addition, the
lords expressly ordered that the brothers give each commissar a gulden a
day and hay and oats for his horse.
***************

1761 Merciless beatings caused brothers to renounce faith
The captured brothers were taken back to the places they had come
from, some to Sabatisch, some to Velké Leváre, and so on. They were
imprisoned under extremely harsh conditions and had to endure bitter

cold. Some of them had to hang with one hand and one foot in the stocks,
unable to sit or lie down, far less stand, and they were made to go very
hungry.
After the brothers had suffered this cruel imprisonment for nine
weeks, their persecutors saw that they could not intimidate or shake them.
It was therefore decided to use still harsher methods and start severe
beatings to force them to give up their faith.
The commissar came to the prison to inform the brothers of the
authorities' decision. The orders were to take each in turn, throw him
down, and beat him. This was to continue daily until they would promise
to become Roman Catholics. The commissar reinforced his words with a
strong oath. The beatings started immediately. He took several brothers
from the prison and brought them to the count in his castle. The first one
to be pulled to the ground and beaten received twenty-five strokes. He held
out bravely and would not give in to them, so he was thrown back into
prison to be beaten again the next day. The second held out for seven or
eight strokes and then promised to be obedient and become a Roman
Catholic. They stopped the beating and released him.
Then it was the third brother's turn. As they seized him to put him on
the ground, he said, If I am to be beaten for a long time and in the end
have to turn Catholic, I would rather do it without a beating.
Equally merciless beatings were given the brothers at Sabatisch. One
named Hans Schmid was reduced to such a terrible condition that he had
to be carried away in a sheet because the flesh was falling from the poor
man's thighs. Some were so battered and crippled by the inhuman beatings
that they never recovered; they died soon after they had weakened and
renounced their faith.
As they were dying, these unhappy men bitterly lamented their
faithlessness in renouncing and denying the divine truth. They said that if
only they had been led straight to execution and killed by the sword or
some other means, they would have suffered death joyfully, but they could
not hold out under such ruthless flogging. They wished that their
persecutors had not stopped but had beaten them to death, for then they

would have won salvation. Instead, they had suffered all this pain and yet
were without comfort.
The rest of the brothers were so terrified by the brutality that one
after another lost courage and gave in. Not one of them trusted himself to
hold out to the end, because each saw that the others could not do so, since
God and his help had deserted them.
Most of them, therefore, did not need to be flogged. One after another
renounced the truth, became Roman Catholic, and so were released from
prison.
When this became known to those who were still scattered in flight,
they, too, lost courage and began to take counsel with flesh and blood.
First one, then another came out of hiding. They fell as autumn leaves fall
from the trees when frost has touched them.
After these had recanted, there were the servants of the Word left who
were held as prisoners in the monasteries. Physically they were treated
very well and were given rich food and drink, so that after five weeks they
came home sleek and fat. It is said that long before their return they, too,
had promised to become Roman Catholic, though they did not openly
admit it for shame that they had proved less steadfast in faith than their
people. This is rumor, however, and uncertain; perhaps it is true and
perhaps not. If one may credit what is commonly said, the preachers even
advised their persecutors to deal with the people by beating them severely.
Anyone can judge for himself what kind of shepherds and ministers
these were.
They all deserted their faith, until not one remained steadfast except
brother Heinrich Müller, the Elder from Velké Leváre who was imprisoned
at Gran in Hungary. Before very long he was put away. It is said that one
evening he had a heated dispute with the priests about the sacrament. The
priests tried to maintain their false opinion that the actual flesh and blood
of Christ is received and eaten. Heinrich Müller refused to accept this
statement. In replying to them he quoted Christ's words from Matthew 15:
Whatever enters the mouth goes into the stomach, etc., commenting, Look

at the great honor given to your Christ. The priests made a great issue of
this, representing it as a terrible blasphemy. Heinrich had to die that same
night. Very early, just at dawn, he was driven to the Danube in a black,
enclosed wagon and was buried. God alone knows what they did to him
and what kind of death he had to suffer. It is believed that they poisoned
him. *
Several years later a noblewoman let the following words slip out to
an apostate brother's wife, who was in service with her as a nurse:
Heinrich Miller was treated very mercifully. He should have had his
tongue cut out of his head for such terrible words.
All the others had to make a statement in church, execrating their
earlier beliefs and swearing an oath to remain loyal to the Roman Catholic
church until death. But one can well imagine what many felt at heart.
Afterward they were called new Christians.
The unfaithful servants of the Word received fifty gulden annually
from the diocese for their support. They were no longer permitted to
preach but were in authority over their former brothers and sisters. These,
too, were favored with a few gulden since they had sworn to become
Roman Catholic.
***************

1762 Request for pass to leave country refused
In 1762 Persecution broke over the church at Alwinz in Transylvania.
Even before an end had been made in Sabatisch and Velké Leváre, the
most eminent of the Jesuits, Delphini, who was director of the whole
campaign, traveled to Vienna and informed the empress that the
Anabaptist sects had already been destroyed and the people converted to
the Christian faith. He said that helpers would soon deal with any
remaining opposition and carry out her wishes to the full. But some people
belonging to this sect were still to be found at Alwinz in Transylvania. If it
were pleasing to Her Majesty, he was ready and willing to go to that

province as well and convert them to the Christian faith. In response, he
received full authority and a letter with the imperial seal.
With this in hand he at once wrote from Vienna in the empress' name,
expressing his wishes to the Transylvanian Council in Hermannstadt in
Transylvania. The government moved into action and a beginning was
made.
The magistrates, including the higher court judge, the town judge, and
several of the landed gentry, came to the community at Alwinz on
September 25 of that same year. They read out an imperial decree
expelling the brothers from the country within six weeks. Her Imperial
Majesty, however, would extend pardon to them, and they would be
tolerated and accepted in the country, if they would renounce their error
and turn to the Roman Catholic, or Lutheran, or Zwinglian religion. The
magistrates then asked for an explicit answer, which of these four options
they chose. The brothers replied, With God's help and grace we intend to
remain faithful and we prefer to leave the country rather than forsake our
faith. They asked to be given a pass so that they could move out of
Transylvania to wherever God would lead them. The higher court judge
told them, We do not have the authority to give you a pass for leaving the
country. Go to the Transylvanian Council in Hermannstadt and ask for a
pass there.
When the magistrates had gone, all the brothers gathered to consult
about what they should do. They decided that brother Joseph Kuhr and
Careth Gentner should go to the Transylvanian Council and ask for a pass.
The two then traveled to Hermannstadt and brought forward the brothers'
request. The Transylvanian Council replied that they could not do it,
because this was a matter involving religion. It should be handled by the
ecclesiastical authorities, they said, and the two brothers should approach
the bishop about it. However, these godless people were not in earnest
about allowing the brothers to leave the country; they were only testing
them as a first step toward their persecution.
The two brothers came before the bishop and presented the
community's plea. They begged him to be gracious and give them a pass
so that they might safely leave the country, for they would not be allowed

over the border without one. The bishop asked why they did not prefer to
become Roman Catholic and remain in the country. The brothers said, We
hold to the true faith, and do not want to adopt another.
In a smooth, courteous manner the bishop urged and advised them to
be open to instruction, to leave their heretical sect and accept the true
Christian faith. For if you refuse, w will have to use force and compel you
to do it. Brother Joseph Kuhr asked if he might reply, and when the bishop
gave him permission to speak, he said, I was once at a Roman Catholic
funeral. I heard the priest say in his funeral address, 'A man who remains
true to his faith until the end is a precious jewel. Since your own clergy
teach and believe that a man is a precious jewel if he continues in his faith
to the end, why do you want to force us to abandon our faith?
After brother Joseph had said this, the bishop made no reply but went
away and left them alone. So they returned home with nothing
accomplished. The community remained in their own houses during the
winter without any disturbances.
In the following year, on April 6, 1763, the authorities arrested Märtl
Roth, the elder of the Alwinz community, and brother Joseph Kuhr and
took them away to Karlsburg. There they were put in prison near the new
gate, with a soldier always standing on watch outside, musket in hand.
They remained there for six months, but there were not many official
visits. The father superior came to them only once and brought two
German lords with him. He asked them why they were in prison. They
replied, We are persecuted and incarcerated by the bishop for our faith in
divine truth. You priests are such good Christians that when you see a light
beginning to glimmer, you try to put it out. ' <Font Color=Red>(Karlsburg
(Alba-Iulia), central Romania, in Transylvania, on Maros River)
The answer so infuriated the father superior that he could say no more
than, Just you wait, you heretics. You're going to be taught a lesson! With
this he left them.
In September an order by the Transylvanian Council for their release
was forwarded from Hermannstadt. The brothers were able to return home
in peace to Alwinz, and the whole community rejoiced and thanked God.

***************

1763 Jesuit Delphini arrives at community/Joseph Kuhr's
refusal to attend his sermon
A little more than six weeks later, the Jesuit Delphini arrived in
Alwinz from Vienna. He went first to the bishop's residence, however, and
took up his quarters there. Almost every day he came to the community,
going from house to house to find how many people lived in each one.
When he had collected sufficient information, he began to carry out what
he had planned. He first made arrangements for all books to be taken away,
just as had been done in Hungary. He appeared one day with the higher
court judge, the town judge, and other people in high positions, as well as
a large number of local peasants. The brothers were called together, and he
asked them to hand over their books. Meanwhile, guards had been placed
at every door. When the brothers rejected his request, he immediately set
out on a house-to-house search with the officials accompanying him. He
pried into every corner, seized every book that was found, and had them
carried off.
In a short time, he returned and summoned all the brothers to the
house of Märtl Roth, the church Elder. When they were gathered, he
showed them written instructions and explained that he was sent by Her
Gracious Majesty, the empress, to convert them from the errors of their
sect to the true Christian faith. They should obey him, and he would teach
them and guide them. The brothers gave him a short answer. They said
they refused to accept a different faith, for they had the true Christian
faith, and with God's help would continue in it. Having heard this,
Delphini withdrew.
A week later he returned, went to the Elder's house and had Märtl
Roth tell the whole community to attend his (Delphini's) sermon. The
people assembled in the meetinghouse as before, and the Elder and his
helpers permitted the Jesuit to preach there. He went to the preacher's
place. The servants of the Word for the community sat next to him on the

bench and listened with the congregation to whatever good teaching the
deceiver might have for them. The Jesuit took as his text Chapter 16 of
John's Gospel, with especial reference to the verse in which Christ says to
his disciples: I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear
them now. He applied this text to the community, meaning that they
understood too little of the Gospels. The following verse says: When he,
the Spirit of truth has come, he will guide you into all truth. This he
applied to himself, and said he was now going to teach them the true faith.
He went on to extol the Roman Catholic faith and to tell of the great
miracles and wonders worked by many Roman Catholic saints. He spoke
in particular about a Jesuit, such as he was, who had moved a mountain,
and about other things which the spirit of error put into his mouth. When
his sermon was finished he sat down on the bench and asked his audience
how they had liked his sermon.
Joseph Kuhr's response was to stand up, face the Jesuit at the table,
and say, What you quoted from the Gospels, I know as well as you do.
What you say about your many saints, I do not believe. And what you say
about a Jesuit moving a mountain is a Jesuit lie. Christ the Lord did not
mean a natural mountain, nor did his apostles move natural mountains.
They took the mountains for granted, just where God put them at the
beginning. Christ meant the authorities and rulers of this world, who often
set themselves up like mountains in the believers' path. They are to be
removed by the believers' steadfast faith.
The Jesuit did not want to be proved wrong. He defended his teaching
as much as he could and was especially eager to maintain that infant
baptism is the true Christian baptism. Joseph Kuhr would not accept what
he said. He gave him a well-founded interpretation of the Scriptures and
discredited Delphini's words. After a lengthy argument, brother Joseph
said to the Jesuit, I hope that through God's grace and help you will not
make a Roman Catholic of me. From this day on, I will never attend your
sermon again. Then he turned around and said to the whole congregation,
Any of you who still claim to be a brother or sister, make your decision
and follow me. With that he walked out of the door. Not one of the whole
congregation followed him out. Even his own son stayed sitting with the
others.

This makes one realize how far they had fallen away and lost courage.
Neither the Elder nor any other brother contradicted the Jesuit with so
much as a word. They all remained silent.
When the Jesuit later met brother Joseph Kuhr in the street, he shook
his finger at him threateningly and said, You wait! I am going to teach
you a lesson. The brother said, What are you going to teach me? You can
do to me only what God permits, and nothing more.
Delphini soon realized he could do nothing with him, and what was
more, that Joseph Kuhr would strengthen the others and encourage them to
be firm in faith. (The brother did this. One day when they were together,
he spoke very earnestly with the brothers and sisters, pleading with
outstretched hands that each would remain steadfast in the truth and in
faith.) The Jesuit therefore deemed it advisable to have him out of the way.
He soon found a very good opportunity.
***************

1764 Joseph Kuhrs' firm stand
Twelve or thirteen years earlier, a brother named Valtin Jänko had
been excluded for his ungodly life and disobedience. To spite the
community he turned Roman Catholic. Consequently, the brothers did not
want to have him living on the place, but he refused to vacate his house.
The community then tore the house down, brother Joseph doing most of it.
Ever since that day, the unfaithful Jänko had nursed fierce hatred and
enmity against brother Joseph. He tried appealing to the magistrates, but
received little satisfaction. One lord told him, My dear man, I'm grateful
you have accepted the Christian faith But that piece of land has been
granted to the New Christians (Anabaptists) and to no one else. That is
what imperial privileges allows. They gave him another holding instead.
The turncoat now thought he had a golden opportunity, so he made his
complaint to the Jesuit. Delphini supported him and succeeded in getting

the authorities to agree that the brothers should pay for the house, which
they valued at sixty gulden.
Delphini seized on this case as a way to imprison Joseph Kuhr on
nonreligious grounds. The higher court judge summoned the four brothers
with the main responsibility for the community: Märtl Roth, the Elder;
Joseph Kuhr, Careth Gentner and Michel Kuhn. They appeared in the
bishop's court and were ordered to pay Janko sixty gulden for his house.
Brother Joseph said he would give nothing and appealed
extermination of to their imperial privileges. No defense could help them,
however, for might counted as right, and brother Joseph was made
prisoner there and then in the bishop's court. His hands were tied behind
his back and he was sent with two Wallachians to the higher court judge at
Wairwaitz. This took place on April 8, 1764. The three other brothers were
released and returned home. The Jesuit, the great hypocrite, pretended to
be sorry that brother Joseph was taken prisoner and said to him, I am sorry
I haven't any money at the moment, or I would be glad to pay the
necessary sum so that you could be released. This was an outright lie, for
the community paid the authorities sixty gulden for the dismantled house,
and they still did not release brother Joseph.
The higher court judge in Wairwaitz threatened brother Joseph with
all the possible consequences, saying he would certainly be taught a
lesson, and so on. The brother was not intimidated. He trusted in the Lord
and said to the judge, What will you teach me? I am not a murderer or a
criminal. I have harmed no one. What is this lesson you want to teach me?
You can do no more to me than God will let you. After this exchange, the
higher court judge sent him to the local justice of the peace with strict
orders to put him in safe custody overnight. The justice obeyed by
shackling Joseph Kuhr's feet and setting four peasants to guard him. The
following day, accompanied by two Wallachians, he was sent to the prison
at Engeten. After Joseph Kuhr had been there three weeks, the bishop
came to Engeten and gave orders for his transfer to the Jesuit monastery at
Klausenburg. *
It was almost midnight when he was removed from the prison at
Engeten. Hands and feet shackled, he was put on a wagon with an armed

guard and taken to the prison at Turda,' where he was held for the night.
The following day his hands and feet were again shackled, and he was
taken by two hussars on a wagon to Klausenburg. **
On the outskirts of Turda, the hussars stopped at an inn for some
breakfast. They ordered a little brandy, which the innkeeper's wife brought
to the wagon. When she saw the brother chained hand and foot, she said to
him, My dear man! Why are you so cruelly bound? He told her, For my
faith, because I refuse to become a Roman Catholic. I have not offended
anyone in any other way. The woman told the brother to take courage and
hold fast to his faith. What one suffers for faith is very precious to God
and will bring a rich reward. She fetched a piece of bread and a drink of
brandy for him. He was glad for such comfort from an unbeliever and felt
much encouraged. He thanked God over and over for this godsend.
When they reached Klausenburg, Joseph was taken directly into the
courtyard of the monastery, and as he was standing by the wagon, with
chains on hands and feet, a priest came up to him and asked, Did you ever
get to know Zacharias Walter from Sabatisch?
He said, Yes, I know him well.
The priest said, You will know him to be a man of good sense. I
traveled thirty miles with him. He, too, has accepted our faith.
The brother replied, His sort of sense isn't mine. I do not think it good
sense for him to abandon his faith.
After Joseph Kuhr's chains were removed, he was locked into a room
in the monastery where he was kept in captivity for a year and eight
months and not allowed to go one step outside.
During this time he was frequently tormented by Jesuits and other
priests who tried in every way to make him recant.
But God always gave him words and wisdom to discredit and silence
them through the divine truth. I will include a few of the encounters here,
to show how steadfast and deeply founded he was in faith.

Once a priest came to him and started a dispute by trying to maintain
that the Roman Catholic faith and church were the true way to eternal life.
The brother replied, If what you say is true, and the Roman church is the
true Christian church, then Christ the Lord did not speak the truth. The
priest asked why. Joseph told him, Because Christ the Lord said to his
disciples and followers, 'You will be persecuted, hunted down, and taken
before kings and princes for my name's sake.' Christ also said that his
disciples would be persecuted from city to city and hated by everyone.
With you it is the other way around, for you do the persecuting and
hunting. When did Christ ever command his apostles to use violence and
force people to believe by chaining and imprisoning them, by beating
them and robbing them of their goods, as you have done to many and are
now doing to me because I will not accept your false teachings? The priest
could give no answer, but reviled him as a false prophet who
misinterpreted the Scriptures, and then left him.
Another time when Father Tranker had disputed with him a long time
and accused him of misinterpreting Scripture, the brother said, As you are
an eminent interpreter of Scripture, explain chapter 17 of the Revelation of
John and tell me the meaning of the Babylonian harlot. What people does
she represent? The priest said, Yes, I will tell you.
He fetched a book and read from it. According to one church scholar,
chapter 17 of the Revelation of John is referring to the original city of
Babel which was built in Nimrod's time. Another saint said it was
Constantinople. A third saint, Augustine, said that John's Revelation spoke
neither of the original Babel nor of Constantinople, but of the city of
Rome.
The brother said, I know this much: it is not the buildings of Rome
that constitute Babylon; it is the people who live in the city, and the
religion that rules there. He lifted his hands toward heaven, adding, And so
I will flee from Babel and shun it my life long. I will pray continually to
God to protect me from drinking the cup of her harlotry, which is her false
teaching.
When the priest heard this, he said, What did I tell you? Just look at
that, you believe what Augustine says. But you refuse to believe all the

other things I told you Augustine says.
The brother replied, I believe it because he was compelled to speak
the truth about it. I believe that Babylon signifies the Roman Catholic
Church and that the pope is the harlot seated on the seven-headed beast,
misleading all nations and deceiving them with her false teaching and
idolatrous life.
From this point on, the brother was left in peace and no one readily
disputed with him.
I must relate one more instance of this brother silencing the priests
and confounding those who were wise in their own conceit. Not far from
the window of the brother's prison room, there stood a stone statue of
Mary. In the early evening, at the hour for vespers, Hungarian women and
girls came and prayed to the statue. After praying, they got up and began
singing in their own language. Their song meant, Have mercy on us, Mary.
Have mercy on us. Take our souls in thy hand and carry them up to God's
throne. The brother understood every word, for he knew Hungarian.
Once when he was again involved in an argument with a priest, he
said to him, I have heard the women sing that Mary the Lord's mother, has
power to take men's souls in her hand and carry them up to God. On what
grounds do you attribute such power to her? It is written that every knee in
heaven and on earth shall bow at the name of Jesus, and men shall worship
him alone. There is nothing written in the Gospel to say we should worship
or pray to the mother of Jesus or entrust our souls to her hand. That is why
we do not believe this. It is something invented by men and robs God of
his honor.
The priest did not know how to answer. He fell silent and went away.
There were far more talks and discussions than are recorded here, too
many for me to include them all. I have given some idea of them to help
and encourage those who come after us. For we can see from these records
that God never forsakes one who holds to him in faith and loyalty and is
straight and true at heart. When God allows his elect to undergo trouble
and hardship in order to test them, he nonetheless comforts and

strengthens them with the invisible might of his Holy Spirit so that their
suffering becomes light and easy to bear. That was also Joseph Kuhr's
experience. He did not find it hard to give up the worldly riches and
property God had blessed him with, nor to leave all his children for the
sake of Christ's name, for he loved God above everything. Therefore,
during this brother's lifetime, God restored to him all he had surrendered
for the sake of God's name, as the following stories will show.
A few days after their talk, the same priest came to him and said, If
you will promise not to escape, we will stop locking you up and will leave
you free to walk around in the baker's house and other places. The brother
answered, I am not a scoundrel or a criminal who will run away. I will
await what God permits you to do to me.
So he was moved to the baker's house, and sometimes helped there of
his own free will when he was asked to give a hand. He stayed there a year
and four months, which meant that he passed three years in the monastery.
At the proper place in this chronicle we will record what happened to him
later.
***************

1764 Delphini's advance on the community
Now that the Jesuit Delphini had put Joseph Kuhr more or less out of
the way, he planned to build his own house on the brothers' property and
live there himself. He asked the community for a plot of land. Märtl Roth,
as Elder, called the brothers together and told them of the Jesuit's wishes.
Some objected to giving permission, saying that once Delphini was
allowed to build a house on the land, he would really settle down among
them, and they would not be free of him so quickly. But the Elder, who
was already unfaithful, although no one yet realized it, gave as his opinion
that it would probably do no harm to the community if the Jesuit were
allowed to build, and it might even be a benefit as they could turn the
building into a school. That was how it was left, and no one had the heart

to oppose the idea anymore, although they did not like it. Fear of men was
too strong.
The Jesuit began his building and made such good progress during the
summer and fall that by winter he could occupy it. In the meantime, he
visited the brothers' homes untiringly and tried with many smooth words
to make the people renounce their faith. Finally he won some over,
including Märtl Roth, the Elder, who then led others into ruin, inducing
them to renounce their faith through his unsound and deceiving talk. As
Elder, whom all the people looked to, it should have been his part to help
build up their faith through encouragement and admonition, to strengthen
them and urge them to remain steadfast. But he very soon proved to be
doing the opposite and was heard saying things like, We do not keep
clearly to our faith in any case. We have already given up community of
goods. We may go on resisting for a long time, and in the end we will still
have to turn Roman Catholic. But God may alter everything. There may
easily be a war in this country, and if there is, we might get a different
government, and might well be able to return to our previous faith.'
Those who still clung to the truth saw that the community was going
to ruin, that the best and most respected brothers had lost all courage and
detennination, and that they themselves were too weak to stand firm if
they remained in Alwinz. Some of them therefore resolved to escape and
go to the community at Kreuz, which was about 75 miles [120 km] from
Alwinz in the Hermannstadt district. (The next part of the chronicle will
describe how the Kreuz community began.) A group of about twenty
people from Alwinz put their plan into action and set out. These included
Johannes Stahl with his Judith and their four children, Michel Wipf with
his wife and two children, Anna Wipf with five children, Jakob Stutz and
his mother, a weaver named Joseph and his mother, and Lorenz Tschetter.
They had not gone far, however, before they were stopped, taken back to
Alwinz and imprisoned in the castle. One of the group, Jakob Stutz,
escaped capture and was able to reach Kreuz and tell the church
community what had happened to the others. Somewhat earlier a young
sister named Gretel Wipf had also come to the community at Kreuz when
she saw that the community at Alwinz was going to ruin.

She could not remain for long, because the Transylvanian Council
ordered the justice of the peace at Kreuz to arrest her and bring her to
Hermannstadt. From there she was sent back to Alwinz, but as soon as she
could she made her way to Kreuz again.
Delphini kept the brothers and sisters in the castle for about three
weeks after they were brought back to Alwinz. They prayed, read, and sang
together, drawing comfort from God's Word in their troubles. Then the
Jesuit took the two eldest brothers, Johannes Stahl and Michel Wipf (also
called Estermichel), and transferred them from Alwinz castle to Engeten.
They were put in a prison where the conditions and stench were so bad for
the inmates' health that very soon most fell sick and many died. Brother
Michel became extremely ill and so was later released. Michel's and
Johannes' wives and children were set free and could return home, together
with Anna Wipf and her children, Lorenz Tschetter, and the mothers of
Jakob Stutz and Joseph Weber.
***************

1764 Church split into three groups
Joseph Weber was a single man, Bohemian by birth. He had come to
Alwinz shortly before and became a brother even though he was still quite
young. He taught Lorenz Tschetter and Elias Wipf the weaver's trade.
Delphini had this brother chained up in Alwinz castle and let it be known
that he would not be released unless he returned to the Catholic faith.
The others kept together and met in brother Michel Wipf's house.
They were not deterred by Delphini's stern orders to obey him, stop the
meetings, and remain in their own homes.
The people at Alwinz were now split into three groups. One group
was already Roman Catholic, one wanted to be part of the church
community at Kreuz, while the third group wished neither to become
Roman Catholic nor to be part of the Kreuz community.

When brother Johannes Stahl and Michel Wipf were in prison at
Engeten, and Joseph Stutz was with the community at Kreuz, the widows
and orphans were unable to continue by themselves at Alwinz and looked
for some way to reach the community at Kreuz.
The community sent brother Peter Müller to help them: The first to
move to Kreuz were Jakob Stutz's mother, Susanna, and Johannes Stahl's
Judith with her four little children. Shortly afterwards came Anna Wipf
and her five children. Anna is still living at this time of writing, 1793.
Lorenz Tschetter, then a youth of seventeen, came over with her. The
community received them joyfully.
Not long afterward, brother Paul Glanzer and brother Elias Wipf were
sent to visit the brothers in prison at Engeten. They were admitted in to see
them, comforted and encouraged them, and urged them to hold fast to the
truth no matter what hardships might come. Their task completed, Paul
and Elias returned home in peace.
***************

1765 Brothers & Sisters returned to Alwinz
The brothers and sisters from Alwinz had been barely three months
in the Kreuz community when the godless Delphini wrote to the
Transylvanian Council at Hermannstadt that these people should be
returned to Alwinz. Since he had been sent by the empress, no one dared to
oppose him, and anything he wished to do received prompt attention.
Consequently, a marshal was dispatched to Kreuz with strict orders to
bring the poor brothers and sisters back to Alwinz.
The marshal, accompanied by the justice of the peace and a number
of citizens from the village, arrived in the yard and explained that he had a
government order to bring the Alwinz people to Hermannstadt. He
required them to be handed over to him because he himself did not know
which they were. The community did not comply, and those from Alwinz
refused to part from the others of their own free will. The hostile villagers

wanted to get rid of them all, so talked the marshal into removing the
entire community from Kreuz. The farmers used their own carts for the
purpose. Only two or three brothers and a few sisters were left to care for
the animals and household goods.
As the marshal was nearing Hermannstadt with all these people, he
began to feel very uneasy, for his orders had been to bring only those from
Alwinz, a total of sixteen who were listed for him. He therefore made a
stop for the night in the nearest village, about half a mile from
Hermannstadt, and rode into the town alone to explain the affair to the
authorities.
The following day, magistrates came out with him to the village.
They again insisted that the Alwinz people should separate from those
belonging to Kreuz. As all refused to do this, the magistrates commanded
the armed escort to seize and bind them. The servant and Elder of the
church, brother Hans Kleinsasser, was the first to be seized and bound.
Then Jakob Stutz stepped forward, saying, I am one of those from Alwinz.
He would have been recognized in any case because he was wearing a blue
Hungarian sheepskin. He was bound as well.
When the armed men had bound the brothers' hands behind their
backs, the two took leave of the community amid tears and with mutual
encouragement to remain steadfast for God and his truth. The magistrates
stood looking on; they and the armed escort then started back for
Hermannstadt with the two brothers in bonds. A very short way from the
village, however, their hearts smote them. They turned around and took
the brothers back, saying, We do not want to have your blood on our hands.
When they reached the others, they let the brothers go. In the meantime,
the group from Alwinz had separated from those belonging to Kreuz, for
they did not want the church community to come into worse difficulties on
their account.
Orders were sent for two more marshals; one was told to take the
Alwinz group to their homes, the other to escort the Kreuz group back to
their community. So the peasants had to use their wagons to return our
people to Kreuz. All this took place in the cold of wintertime, December
1765.

When the marshal had brought the people back to Alwinz, he handed
them over to Delphini. They were released and allowed to go to their
homes. But they did not stay there. They met in Michel Wipf's house once
more to read, pray, and sing together and strengthen themselves as best
they might in this time of trouble.
At that time, brother Jakob Stutz was the most highly regarded among
them. He was well-versed in the Holy Scriptures and was clever at other
things, too, although later he fell away and recanted. The Jesuit was eager
to have him out of the way. He sent the bailiff with a group of armed men
to the house where the people were gathered. Jakob realized at once that
they intended to arrest him, so he fled and hid himself. Although many
people searched for him all through the yard and buildings, they were
unable to find him.
As soon as the search was over and the bailiff and all the armed men
had gone, Jakob again made his way to Kreuz. It was impossible for the
other brothers and sisters to remain at Alwinz, and they sought ways and
means to reach Kreuz. The brotherhood there saw they could not refuse
help to these poor women and children, left without husbands or fathers,
who were bound by love to the church and wanted to save their souls, but
were too weak to keep faithful if they remained at Alwinz. The brothers
gave them as much help as they could. Although the attempt was fraught
with danger, they sent brother Veit Glanzer with a sled and a pair of horses
to Alwinz to fetch the poor people to Kreuz. With God's merciful
protection the journey was completed in safety.
The fugitives were now in the community at Kreuz. Yet the brothers
knew that they would not be safe there for long; the priest would soon send
for them again. As they had heard Delphini was particularly intent on
catching Jakob Stutz, they decided that this brother and Elias Wipf should
go to visit Joseph Kuhr in Klausenburg (for they now knew that he was
imprisoned in this town). The community took leave of Jakob and Elias
and the brothers started on their way, commended to the grace of God. At
Klausenburg they made inquiries about brother Joseph. They showed too
little caution, however. When they sent someone into the Jesuit monastery
to discover where Joseph was, their messenger asked openly for the

prisoner from Alwinz. He succeeded in meeting and speaking with Joseph,
but was then taken before the head of the monastery. Questioned about
who had sent him in, he betrayed the two brothers. Armed guards were
immediately dispatched to arrest them. Jakob and Elias were held in
prison at Klausenburg all through the summer and into the autumn. Then
their faith wavered. They fell away and promised to become Roman
Catholic, so they were set free and returned home to Alwinz.
At the beginning of 1766, Michel Wipf fell seriously ill and was
therefore released from his imprisonment at Engeten and allowed to go
home. Brother Johannes Stahl was held prisoner for some time longer, but
at last he, too, was set free. Both were released with clear consciences.
***************

1766 Most of the believers were forced to become unfaithful
As has been said, some had already become unfaithful, but the
greater number were not yet Catholic. The priest felt that their conversion
was taking too long and threatened to station soldiers in the houses of any
who had not yet given in. Märtl Roth tried to persuade him against such a
move, telling him to have patience; Märtl himself would win over the
people by friendly words, without any need of soldiers. This could not
really be expected, however, as the brothers and sisters refused to turn
Roman Catholic of their own free will. The Jesuit, therefore, began to use
force. The authorities supplied him with a corporal and four or five
common soldiers. He stationed them in various homes, and the people had
to supply them with food and drink. Every Sunday or festival day these
soldiers drove the people to church with blows and beatings. This went on
for maybe six months or a little more.
The priest also wrote to the Transylvanian Council in Hermannstadt
that they should bring back the fugitives who belonged to Alwinz. The
captain of the town militia was accordingly dispatched to Kreuz with a few
armed attendants. They stopped overnight with the village justice of the

peace and next day brought him and other officials to the community. He
read out a stern order from the Transylvanian Council that the
congregation at Kreuz should have nothing whatsoever to do with the
Alwinz people, neither by way of books nor by any other means. They
should not give them shelter or lodging but should leave them entirely
alone. The brothers' answer was that God should be obeyed rather than
men, and the word of God commands us to give hospitality to guests and
strangers. A great deal more was said, but cannot all be recorded here.
Again the Alwinz people were to be separated from the people of
Kreuz. The captain found it no easy task. He tried very hard to find out
about Jakob Stutz and Elias Wipf, but no one told him they had been sent
to Klausenburg. Many of the children and brothers and sisters were forced
to go to the justice's house. The captain was not harsh and cruel by nature,
but a kindly man who expected that by talking in a friendly manner he
would coax the children to tell him which of them came from Alwinz and
where Jakob and Elias were. But most of them simply said they would not
betray anyone, for that would be against love to their neighbor.
With much effort and persistent questioning, he at last secured
everyone from Alwinz except Stutz and Elias. Those from Kreuz were sent
home. He took the Alwinz people to Hermannstadt with him, the villagers
again having to provide wagons for the journey. From Hermannstadt they
were sent back to Alwinz and again handed over to the Jesuit. He returned
them all to their own homes with strict orders that they stay there.
He put Lorenz Tschetter to live with Müller, who had already become
Roman Catholic. Soldiers were set on guard to keep him there, but he
refused to stay and work for the unfaithful weaver, although they fetched
him back three times and beat him severely. Brother Estermichel (Michel
Wipf) urged him not to be afraid, but to keep valiant and courageous. The
soldiers were furious about this, too, and gave Michel Wipf several blows
as well. This Michel Wipf fought bravely for the truth for a time. He was
put in chains and endured terrible imprisonment as has already been
described. Yet soon afterward, he, too, weakened and forsook his faith.
Brother Lorenz did not know what to do in his desperation. His
conscience would not allow him to lodge and work with the weaver. If he

were found anywhere else he knew only too well he would be beaten
harder than before. So he took the risk, and very early one morning, before
dawn, he set out and arrived alone at the Kreuz community. When he told
them of the terrible situation at Alwinz, the whole community was deeply
grieved by what was happening.
The Jesuit returned Judith Stahl and her children to their house. Her
husband, now back from prison, was put with her. Then a soldier was
stationed in their home to keep watch on them, and they had to supply him
with food and drink and whatever else he required. On Sundays and feast
days, he forced them to attend church. If they refused, they were beaten.
The cruelty was so great that brother Johannes Stahl could no longer stay
at home but had to flee for a time. He sometimes visited his wife and
children by night. Delphini stationed a soldier in Anna Wipf's house, too,
to keep watch on her and force her into going to church.
As a result of the hardship and oppression, all recanted except a few
who still kept true to the community at Kreuz. Careth Gentner and Michel
Kuhn gave their promises to the Jesuit. These two brothers were looked up
to by the people and were next in responsibility to the elders. After they
had recanted, the others fell away one by one, for it was said that those two
really understood the Scriptures and would know what they were doing. As
soon as someone gave in to the godless priest, the soldier was removed
from his house.
Since he had won over all the others, the Jesuit now strove all the
harder to win the remaining few, and the soldiers treated them very cruelly.
The poor women, in particular Anna Wipf and Judith, were beaten so hard
that finally they gave way under the harsh treatment and renounced their
faith. Of the entire Alwinz community, only three people had never
promised, to become Roman Catholic. These were Joseph Kuhr, Johannes
Stahl, and Lorenz Tschetter, none of whom were any longer a Alwinz.
When the false prophet Delphini had succeeded in making them all
unfaithful, he sent a letter to the monastery at Klausenburg, intending to
rob Joseph Kuhr of all courage. Father Tranker called the brother to his
house and read the letter out to him. The Jesuit had written that everyone
at Alwinz was converted to the Christian faith and had recognized it as the

true way of salvation. They had fallen down before the bishop and thanked
God they had been granted the grace to be freed from their error and
brought to righteousness, light, and faith. (This was nothing but lies, since
not one had come before the bishop, far less all.) So Joseph, too, should
accept instruction and renounce his faith.
Joseph did not lose courage or weaken in faith. He replied, I am very
sorry indeed that they were so weak in faith and let themselves be misled.
But what can I do about it? Each of us has to bear his own burden, for it is
written that the son shall not be held responsible for his father's sin, nor
the father for his son's. Each one must render his own account on the
Judgment Day.
The priest threatened, You will be sent to a country where you will
say, 'Oh, if only I had turned Roman Catholic!'
To which the brother replied, You can send me where you wish. God
the Lord is everywhere, and I know with absolute certainty that he will
never desert me, but will stand by me to deliver me from every trouble.
Now we return to those at Alwinz.
***************

1766 Kreuz community persecuted
God the Lord, who knows all hearts, saw that these poor brothers and
sisters had stumbled and fallen out of great weakness, but that their inmost
longing was to remain true and faithful. Therefore he helped them up
again, for his hand lay heavy on them. Their hearts and consciences were
filled with dread because they had denied God and his truth for fear of
men. After a short breathing space, they did not remain at Alwinz; they
again went to Kreuz.
The brothers at Kreuz were uncertain whether they should receive
them. But they showed how deeply sorry they were for weakening; they

humbled themselves and confessed their sin before God and the church;
they asked forgiveness and promised with God's help to bear both good
and bad times with the community. Then the church reunited with them
and interceded for them before God. So they and their children were
received back into the community's care.
Delphini realized that the community at Kreuz was a continual
hindrance to the completion of his plan. He resolved to go to Kreuz and
use the same cruel persecution to force the people to accept the Roman
Catholic faith.
First the Jesuit went to Hermannstadt. The Transylvanian Council
provided him with one of its members, commanding a hundred men to
accompany him to Kreuz. Delphini took the son of the apostate Märtl Roth
along with him as well. When they reached Kreuz, they went to the justice
of the peace. The councilman informed the justice of their errand, saying
they had orders from the Transylvanian Council in Hermannstadt, and it
was the justice's duty to assist the Jesuit in every way. Although the justice
and his whole village were of the Lutheran faith, they were afraid to
object, and so gave their assent.
The next day the Jesuit himself came to the community with the
councilman, justice of the peace, an armed escort, and citizens from the
village. He led the way and the others followed, going through every room,
closet, and attic. Whenever he met someone from Alwinz he pointed his
finger at the person, who was immediately seized by the justice and the
armed escort. After Delphini had rounded them all up, they were forced by
the armed men and citizens to go to the justice's house. Here they were
well-guarded by the farmers to prevent any escape.
Next the community was gathered in the yard. The councilman from
Hermannstadt said he had an order to deliver to them. When everyone was
quiet and attentive, he told them the Transylvanian Council had sent strict
orders for them to listen to the priest next morning at ten o'clock. The
Jesuit added, Tomorrow and every day thereafter. He pointed his finger at
himself and said, Yes, I am the one you must listen to.

The brothers refused point-blank. They said they would not move one
step to please this false prophet, far less listen to his false teaching, for
they knew well enough the villainy and deceit of the Roman Catholic
church, and they thanked God for delivering them from such darkness and
blasphemous error. The Jesuit need not think they would submit to him or
go over to the Roman Catholic religion. They were determined, with God's
help, to suffer all things, even death, rather than return to such error and
false beliefs. A great deal more was said than is written here. Every
brother spoke out boldly and confidently and told him the truth straight to
his face. Even the sisters did not remain silent. The Jesuit walked up and
down, scowled and found nothing to say but, Just you wait. I'll teach you a
lesson. And he went away with his followers.
He recognized at once that he had no easy task in front of him; so he
did not waste time at Kreuz, but withdrew to Hermannstadt, where he
ordered the authorities to start a search for brother Johannes Stahl. He
described his appearance: a man of fifty years, short, with black, curly
hair.
The community at Kreuz had a wagon and four oxen. The villagers
seized them, loaded the people from Alwinz into the wagon and drove a
day's journey toward Hermannstadt. The next day the marshal took another
wagon and let the oxen go back to Kreuz.
When the group from Alwinz reached the town on the third day, they
were imprisoned in the town hall.
Johannes Stahl had been a fugitive all this time, living in one place
and another with people he knew. It so happened that he came into
Hermannstadt and heard the Alwinz people had been removed from Kreuz
again and were now held prisoner in the town hall. As his wife and
children were in the group, he visited them in the prison.
He then went out to the marketplace to buy them a little bread. When
he returned with it and was entering the gate of the town hall, he came face
to face with one of the most distinguished councilmen, Peter Hannenheim,
who asked him who he was and where he was going. With complete
openness, Johannes told him his name and errand: he was going to visit his

wife and children, who were imprisoned in the town hall. Now the
councilman, a Lutheran, carried out the Jesuit's orders as part of his
official duties, but did it against his will. He was unhappy about meeting
the brother and said angrily, I have orders to search for you and arrest you,
and you run straight into my hands! I am obliged to take you prisoner
although I do not wish to do it.
The brother replied, I am in your power, and you can do what you
wish with me.
So he was put in prison with the others, and they were all transferred
from Hermannstadt back to Alwinz. Brother Johannes Stahl and Lorenz
Tschetter were imprisoned in the castle; the sisters and children were
allowed to go home. This took place in August 1766.
These unfortunate sisters and their children were returned to Alwinz
two or three times more, for although Delphini took the children straight
into his own house, clothed and cared for them (for they were in a pitiable
condition after all their troubles and had them baptized into the Roman
Catholic faith, they never would stay there. As soon as they could, they
escaped to Kreuz. This continued until the following year, 1767, when they
moved from Transylvania to Wallachia with the Kreuz community. More
will be told about this later.
***************

1767 Account of what happened to whoever was left
The brothers in Alwinz castle remained prisoners until October.
When the Jesuit saw they did not weaken but held firmly to their faith, he
had them sent to Klausenburg, intending to banish them both from the
country, and Joseph Kuhr with them.
While Johannes and Lorenz were going under guard from Alwinz, the
apostate Jakob Stutz joined them and walked part of the way at their side.
He urged them to have courage and remain steadfast, saying that once a

man falls from faith and denies the truth, he loses all peace of heart, and
his conscience continually accuses him like a gnawing worm, as he was
finding from his own experience. They should hold firm. God would stand
by them and lend them strength. Even though these words were spoken by
a backslider, the brothers welcomed the encouragement, for from the
standpoint of the flesh they were in great need and distress. One can well
imagine what they must have felt at heart, especially brother Johannes
Stahl, who had left behind him his wife and four children in deep trouble
and did not know if he would ever see them again. These brothers were
without any comfort or help from their fellowmen, but God the Lord gave
them fortitude, so that they did not waver and despair in face of all the
difficulties.
When they arrived at Klausenburg they were put in the prison. Joseph
Kuhr was transferred from the monastery to the guards' room. They were
not allowed to see each other, but brother Joseph came to hear that two
prisoners had been brought from Alwinz, although he did not know who
they were. With friendly words he persuaded the guards to let them meet.
The two brothers were overjoyed to see Joseph, for they had not expected
to find him there. They thought he had been expelled from the country
long since. After a short meal together the two brothers had to return to
their prison, but they had been greatly reassured and strengthened in faith
by brother Joseph.
Two priests came to them, wanting to have long talks and make them
deny their faith, but the brothers refused to listen and sent them away.
Four days later, all three were taken from prison and escorted by an
armed guard to the justice of the peace in the nearby village. The justice
set four peasants to guard them overnight. Next day, the three were put on
a wagon. Joseph Kuhr's feet were secured with a strongly locked chain and
brothers Johannes and Lorenz were shackled together. A commissar and
twelve peasants were ordered to take them from one county to another
until they reached the town of Sighet in the province of Maramures, where
they were imprisoned for two weeks.
Brother Joseph Kuhr and Johannes Stahl were then brought from
prison to appear before the council and were asked if they would become

Roman Catholic. The brothers answered with a brief No. The councilmen
said, If you refuse to turn Roman Catholic, we have an order from the
government at Hermannstadt to expel you from the country.
Brother Joseph replied, God's will be done. He asked the councilmen
to let brother Lorenz go with them, but they would not grant this. The
order applies only to the two of you, they said. So brother Lorenz had to
stay behind in the prison while the other two brothers were escorted by a
commissar and a courier from one village to another until they reached the
mountains at the Polish border. Then the commissar told the brothers, Here
is the boundary. If you are ever found in Transylvania again, your lives
will be forfeit. He handed them a document stating that they had been
expelled from Transylvania and left them there alone in a wild, desolate
area of thickly wooded mountains.
The brothers fell on their knees in fervent prayer, calling on God to
have compassion on them and send them his good and holy angels to
protect them from disaster.
When they rose from praying, brother Johannes asked brother Joseph,
What are we to do now?
Brother Joseph said, What are we to do? We are going to continue
along this path wherever God may lead us. So they began following the
footpath in the name of the Lord, in full faith and trust in God. After three
days, they at last came out of the mountains and reached a market town in
Poland. That was in November 1766. At a later point this chronicle will
relate what happened subsequently to these brothers.
Brother Lorenz Tschetter was held in prison in Sighet for another
twelve weeks. It seems as if the Jesuit was hoping that since Lorenz was
quite young, long imprisonment would wear him down. During those
weeks his captors often threatened to take him for a soldier, and other such
things. When he refused to give way, he was finally removed from prison
and brought back by a two-man escort from county to county in the
direction of Alwinz. Somewhere near Klausenburg his escort disappeared.
Left perfectly free, he made his way to Medias and from there to Kreuz,
and so came peacefully and joyfully back to the community in March

1767. He did not fall into the Jesuit's hands again, and in the autumn of the
same year he was with the community in its flight from Transylvania to
Wallachia.
A short but accurate and thorough account has now been given of how
the church community in Alwinz, Transylvania, was brought to an end. As
has been recorded, the greater part became Roman Catholic. Brother
Joseph Kuhr and Johannes Stahl were in exile. Through God's intervention,
a few went with the community from Kreuz when they fled the country to
escape the relentless persecution. I will record their names to keep their
memories alive for their descendants.
Nineteen souls in all.

Joseph Kuhr [53]
Lorenz Tschetter [ 19]

Johannes Stahl [42] with his Judith [40] and four children.
Johannes Stahl [14] Heinrich [61] Benjamin [4] Gretel [8]

Anna Wipf with her five children.
Elias Wipf [19] Johannes [14] Samuel [6] Gretel [18] Annele[5]

Gretel [Susanna] Zillich
Gretel Wipf [ 19]
Andreas Kuhr

Joseph Kuhr
Gretel Kuhr
(These did not leave Transylvania until 1782. They joined the church
in Russia.)
List of the souls from Alwinz who were saved.
***************

1752-1802 PART 3 Account of the Carinthian Hutterites
To the Reader 2
So far I have described how the church community of God in
Moravia, Hungary, and Transylvania began to decline and fall into
spiritual and temporal ruin, and recounted how it was completely stamped
out in these countries. I collected passages from old writings by the
servants of the Word to illustrate the gradual deterioration. For an account
of the persecution and suppression, I went repeatedly to people whom I
knew could give me a reliable firsthand report and made every effort to
find out exactly what happened. For example, brother Jakob Walter, son of
Zacharias Walter, who was Elder at Sabatisch, recorded something about
the events in Hungary, and most of my account is obtained from his.
Brother Joseph Kuhr gave me the greater part of my information on what
happened in Alwinz, Transylvania, and on the persecution there.
Now I will continue telling how God the Lord did not let the light of
divine truth die down and be entirely extinguished. To the praise and glory
of his name, he left a tiny spark alive and has kept it alive to this very day,
as can be found in the following history.

***************

1752 Account of How and Where Our Church Began
(Johannes Waldner means the revival of church community through
the Carinthians in Transylvania, who helped to bring fresh life to the old
Hutterian church, which had almost ceased to exist)
In particular, how God delivered our forefathers from the gross error,
blindness, and darkness of popery and led them to the recognition of
divine truth; a description, too, of how the church began to gather and be
built up; how the enemy of divine truth tried by every means to hinder it,
stirring up fierce persecution against the believers; and how God rescued
his people from this oppression by leading them out of the country from
near Kronstadt over the Transylvanian Alps into Wallachia. *
Next, the community's sufferings in Wallachia during the Turkish
wars, their journey by God's will and leading through Moldavia and the
Kingdom of Poland into the Ukraine, and all other noteworthy events in
the church up to the present day are carefully recorded in a very simple
way for the benefit of all who come after us.
In 1752, in the archduchy of Carinthia, a great awakening was stirred
by the books and teachings of Dr. Martin Luther. This area was out-and-out
Roman Catholic, however, and no one belonging to the Lutheran,
Calvinist, or any other religion was allowed to remain there. All the
ceremonies and usages of the Roman Catholic Church were diligently
performed and strictly observed with fasting, many prayers, and the
invocation of various patron saints; worship of images, especially of
Mary; the purchase of many masses, and making the sign of the cross;
wearing rosaries and scapulars; pilgrimages, confessions, and innumerable
other idolatrous practices. The poor, ignorant people in their blindness and
error were zealous in such observances, since they had been taught nothing
better. They knew of nothing else because common people never had a
copy of the Holy Scriptures in their hands. Peasants were strictly
forbidden to possess a Bible. The common people had to believe what the
priest preached to them from the pulpit and whatever might have been

written in Roman Catholic books by Augustine, Ambrose, Bernard, and
other old church fathers. **
The Roman Catholic catechism contains these words: I believe what
is commanded by the holy Roman Catholic church, whether it is written in
the Bible or not. (Not all the truths revealed for us by God are found in the
Bible; some are found only in Divine Tradition. ... By Divine Tradition is
meant the revealed truths taught by Christ and His apostles, which were
given to the Church only by word of mouth and not through the Bible,
though they were put in writing by the Fathers of the Church. ... Divine
Tradition must be believed firmly as the Bible because it also contains the
word of God. ... We can know the true meaning of the doctrines contained
in the Bible and in the Divine Tradition from the Catholic Church, which
has been authorized by Jesus Christ to explain His doctrines, and which is
preserved from error in its teachings be the special assistance of the Holy
Ghost)
At the beginning of this book, we have recorded that when Martin
Luther brought to light all the deceit and trickery of the Roman Catholic
church, he wrote a great deal against the papacy. Not only he, but other
scholars such as the renowned Johann Arndt, Joseph Schaitberger, the
fugitive Father Christof Fischer, and more beside, wrote in sharp
opposition to the terrible blasphemies, the sale of indulgences, the worship
of images of dead saints, and praying to the mother of God. With many
proofs from the Holy Scriptures, both the Old and the New Testament, they
made plain that these things are against the Word of God and they rejected
such Roman Catholic ceremonies as human inventions, accursed and
condemned to hell.
***************

1752 Roots of the Carinthian Hutterites
These books and writings were introduced into Carinthia in the mideighteenth century. Although they were brought in secretly, they produced

a great ferment and revival. Many peasants stopped attending church and
read the Bible and other books in their homes instead. They also began
holding secret meetings at night. For the joy of hearing God's Word, many
often went long distances through the dark in rain, snow, and wind. In
these meetings they prayed, read from the Bible and other books, sang, and
talked together. This was happening not only in one place but had spread to
nearly every judicial district in Carinthia, for instance to the areas around
Gailtal, Paternion, Himmelsberg, Spittal, and other places. *
The Roman Catholic clergy could not tolerate this, for what they
represented was being belittled and despised. They therefore used
energetic measures to stifle the fire. All who were suspected of
contamination by Lutheran teachings were summoned to the priest's
house, closely questioned whether they had forbidden books, and given
strict orders to reveal and hand them over. Anyone later found with a
Bible, New Testament, or any Lutheran book was to be fined twelve,
eighteen, twenty, or twenty-four gulden, according to the size of the book.
Reading such books therefore became very dangerous and could be
done only with the greatest secrecy. There were many constables and spies
who crept by night to listen at the doors and windows of houses to
discover if people were reading and singing from the forbidden books. As
soon as these children of Judas found anything suspicious, they betrayed
people to the authorities. The homes were then visited and searched. Any
books that were found were confiscated, and the householder had to pay a
heavy fine. This happened to Johannes Hofer from St. Peter' when some
traitor told the sheriff that Johannes had a Bible. **
Next the authorities ordered everyone to bring all books to the priest's
house. Here the books were examined. Those which were not Roman
Catholic were confiscated; the Roman Catholic books were stamped with a
coat of arms on the title page and returned to the owner. Little was
achieved by this, as the people did not bring all the forbidden books;
mostly they brought only the Roman Catholic ones. They hid the Bible and
the Lutheran books all the more carefully, and this was especially the case
in Gailtal.

When this was brought to the notice of the authorities, they made
another house search. Anyone found in possession of a book without a
stamp was ruthlessly beaten and heavily fined as well.
It is said that one man was executed with the sword for holding
Lutheran beliefs. This is what happened: At a major church holy day,
crowds of people were carrying out their idolatrous practices according to
Roman Catholic custom, making offerings, praying and so on in front of
the crucifixes and other images set up for the purpose. One man from the
Lutheran side said to another, Why ever is there such a crowd? To which
the other replied, Why should it surprise you? Christ says in the Bible that
where there is a dead body the vultures will gather. Someone overheard
and reported him. He was at once arrested, brought before a court, and
asked if he realized what he had said and if he intended to keep to his
statement. He replied that he could not say anything else, for he regarded
their idolatry as nothing but loathsome carrion. The papists considered his
words a terrible blasphemy and they condemned him to death.
In every town and village, priests and chaplains shouted from their
pulpits against the Lutherans; they cursed Martin Luther's teachings and
damned them to the lowest depths of hell. One of them complained in his
sermon of how much the peasants were swayed by the blasphemies of
Luther's books, and expressed his opinions as follows:
Nothing is kept in its proper place anymore. Many people have the
effrontery to meddle in matters not fitting for them. A farmer or head of a
family should have a plow, whip, or oxgoad in his hands, not the Book. His
wife should have a cooking spoon and household keys, not the Book. A
farm laborer should have a hoe, woodcutter's axe, flail, or manure fork, not
the Book. A servant girl should be at the spinning wheel, feeding the pigs,
or similar work, not occupied with the Book. But now no one is content
with his rightful station and work; everyone wants to be a priest.
I cannot go further into this, however, but must return to my
narrative.
***************

1752 Open persecution against all Protestants
In spite of the strong measures used by the Roman Catholics,
resistance strengthened and more and more people fell away from the
papacy. As a result, open persecution began against all who accepted the
Lutheran religion or the Augsburg Confession. The sheriff from Spittal,
Johannes Turteltaub, was appointed as commissioner of religion and
received instructions from the imperial court to purge the archduchy of
Carinthia of Lutheranism. This led to decisive action. *
Johannes Turteltaub sent his couriers or constables to summon all
who were suspected of Lutheran beliefs to assemble in the market town of
Spittal. He questioned them individually, warning them to recant and
return to the Roman Catholic religion, and threatening the young people in
particular that he would have them held down and whipped. He ordered the
flogging block to be brought out to show how it would be, and he kept
some of them imprisoned for several weeks to intimidate them.
Those who remained firm and refused to revert to Roman
Catholicism were immediately informed that they could no longer be
tolerated in the country. They were to be driven from their homes, their
farms and property, and deported to Transylvania. To frighten them still
more, they were told how they would be treated in that country: they
would be forced to live in destitution for the rest of their lives. The little
children would starve, for there would be no bread, far less anything else
to give them.
Their friends and relatives begged and pleaded with them to stay in
their homes. Why should they go away? God the Lord was everywhere,
and they could believe whatever they wished in their hearts even if they
had to attend church and observe the Roman Catholic faith.
Some gave way when it came to the point of leaving their worldly
possessions, wife, child, brother, sister, and other relatives and friends.
They could not overcome and give up worldly goods for the sake of their

faith. These subsequently had to make a public recantation and Confession
of Faith in church.
Most remained firm, however, and left their farms and houses and all
their property. Many prosperous, respected heads of families left
everything they had.
Many young, unmarried men and women left parents, relatives, and
everyone they knew and declared publicly that the Lutheran doctrine was
the truth and the way to eternal life. They refused to be intimidated by
mockery, threats, bonds, or imprisonment. A good part of them did not
wait to be summoned, but went of themselves to the commissioner of
religion to have their names added to the list.
***************

1752 List of those who began our Church community
1752 List of those who began our Church community
Our own forefathers were among those who held firmly to the
Lutheran doctrine, namely:

Johannes Kleinsasser from Amlach, his wife Barbara, his three
brothers and one daughter.
Stephanus (20) Mathies (17) Joseph (15) Christina

Georg Waldner with his Anna and three children, also from Amlach:
Christian, Johannes and Maria

Peter Müller from Unteramlach; Michel and Mathies Hofer, also
from Amlach, left father, mother, and a brother.

Andreas Wurz from St. Peter with his Margareta and five children:
Christian, Magdalena, Elisabeth, Anna and Christina

Christian Glanzer, also from St. Peter, with his Maria, his three
brothers Martin, Paul, and Veit and two children:
Christian and Anna

Johannes Hofer from St. Peter with his wife Anna, five sons and two
daughters:
Johannes, Michel, Christian, Paul, Jakob, Anna and Barbara

Christian Nägeler from Stockenboi in the jurisdiction of Paternion
with his Dorothea and three daughters:
Katharina, Christina and Maria

Joseph Müller from Lentsach with his wife Elisabeth and two
children:
Joseph and Barbara

Jakob Egerter from St. Peter and his two sisters, Christina and Anna.
Johannes Plattner from St. Peter and his sister Elisabeth. Georg Gurl with
his Lena from the Himmelberg jurisdiction; Johannes Amlacher from
Oberamlach; Valentin Resch; Christina and Elisabeth Winkler from
Oberarnlach; and Rosina Bichler from St. Peter.
***************

1755 Exiled to Transylvania rather than accept Roman
Catholicism
The commissioner of religion gave orders that all who would not
recant must prepare for the journey. They, their wives and children, and the
little bedding they were allowed to take with them, were loaded on wagons
provided by the authorities Constables or couriers drove them from Spittal
to Klagenfurt. The movable and immovable property left behind was listed
and its value assessed. The exiles were promised that it would be sent after
them. Nothing was done, however, and very few ever received anything
from their previous possessions.
On their arrival in Klagenfurt they were put in the penitentiary in the
fort and well-guarded by soldiers. They had to work there carrying stone,
sand, and mortar, and giving other help to the masons working in the
penitentiary. This lasted for about two months. From Klagenfurt they were
taken through Styria in Austria to the town of Ybbs on the Danube. * Here
they were locked in the barracks and closely guarded. They had to wait
two months until more emigrants had arrived and 270 were assembled. In
September 1755, they were moved on from Ybbs by boat. This part of the
journey lasted three weeks. They were taken to Vienna in Austria and on
down the Danube into Hungary, via Pressburg, Komorn, Gran, Buda, and
Peterwardein. **
From Peterwardein they had to haul the transport boats through the
canal that had been dug there, until they reached Temesvar, the capital of
Banat. ***

Here they left the boats and were taken by wagon into Transylvania.
After two weeks traveling they arrived safely at Szaszvaros.I The
following day they were brought to a village called Rumes.2 They were
lodged with neighboring farmers, and the authorities said they were to
settle in the place. This was in October 1755. ****
***************

1755 Lutherans did not follow Gospel truth
After a few days, a Lutheran councilman came to Rumes from
Szaszvaros. His name was Kraft. He and the Lutheran pastor of the place
called all the immigrants together and assembled them in a large room.
The Lutheran pastor read out a letter sent in the empress' name with the
following contents:
Because they had declared their adherence to the Lutheran religion
while in Germany, namely in the Archduchy of Carinthia, where only
Roman Catholicism was allowed, the empress had ordered their removal at
her own expense to Transylvania, where the Lutheran religion was
tolerated. Here they could have the Gospel, which had been their desire in
Austria. But since Her Imperial Majesty has shown you such especial
favor, she requires each and every one of you to swear an oath assuring her
of your future loyalty. She will then continue to be gracious to you, and
will have houses built for you at her expense and will give you fields,
meadows, and other necessities.
The immigrants were both astounded and dismayed when they heard
they must swear allegiance to the empress. They refused, for they had left
their native land in order to have the freedom to live according to the
gospel and now they were to be forced to swear an oath, which was
directly against the Gospel.
Mathies Hofer was the first to voice his opposition. He said to the
councilman and the Lutheran pastor, How can you demand that we do
something Christ has forbidden? And he quoted in full from Matthew 5

and James 5. The councilman said, You may be able to read well, but you
don't understand what you read. Why haven't you read Romans 13 as well:
'Whoever resists the authorities, resists the ordinance of God'? A great
deal more was said, but the exact words are no longer known.
Valentin Resch and others then expressed their refusal to take the
oath. It became impossible to conclude the matter immediately.
The Lutherans were not content to leave affairs like this, however.
They persisted in their demand until most of the immigrants had taken the
oath of allegiance to Her Imperial Majesty. Once the newcomers had
sworn, houses were built for them, fields, meadows, and other necessities
were given them, and they were promised that the goods left behind in
Carinthia would be forwarded.
Although our forefathers (whose names are recorded above) had also
accepted the original Augsburg Confession, they were not to be coerced
into acting in plain opposition to the Gospel. Through God's grace they
soon realized that the Lutheran churches did not follow Gospel truth nor at
all justify the expectations they had formed while still in Carinthia. They
found a great deal of wrong and injustice within the church, especially the
insatiable greed of the pastors, oath-taking, abusive talk, lying, deceit,
fornication, adultery, drunkenness, and similar sins, all of them against the
Gospel.
Deeply troubled and dissatisfied at heart, they did not know what to
do. During the first winter they attended the Lutheran church and allowed
their children to be baptized.
***************

1755 Unite with the Hutterian Brethren
The Steadfast Minority of Lutherans from Carinthia Unite with the
Hutterian Brethren -- Persecution Begins.

God (who knows the hearts of men) saw their faithfulness and
integrity. He saw how they hungered and thirsted after righteousness and
longed to follow what was best and most perfect. Therefore, in his great
grace and compassion, he brought them to true light and recognition and
continued showing them the error and false teaching in the Lutheran
Church. This happened by God's special intervention, as shall now be told.
Our forefathers spent the winter in great poverty, each trying to
surmount the hardships as best he could. When spring came and work in
field and garden began once more, they went around looking for
employment in nearby towns and villages so that they could earn
something to provide food for their wives and children. Some of the young
people hired themselves out as servants in various places.
While two of the men, Andreas Wurz and Georg Waldner, were
looking for employment, they came to Alwinz, which is only a half-day's
journey from Rumes. They asked for work and were hired. After they had
been in Alwinz a few days, it happened that the brothers hired them.
Andreas and Georg soon noticed from their manner of life that the
brothers were a markedly different group. They therefore began talking to
them, asking many questions about their faith and the basis of their life. In
response, the Alwinz brothers explained in what points their faith differed
from that of the Roman Catholics and Lutherans, namely on infant
baptism, the Lord's Supper, war and government authority, separation of
Marriages, and the swearing of oaths.
In addition to these talks, Andreas and Georg heard several sermons
and teachings and read for themselves in the old books and writings. They
were delighted about what they heard, for when they compared it with the
Gospel they found it harmonized and corresponded exactly, especially on
the question of swearing oaths, which they had already had to contend
with. Soon they were convinced in their hearts by God and his holy Word
that this teaching was the divine truth and the way to eternal life. They
resolved to accept it.
Although the church at Alwinz had fallen a long way, and Christian
community of goods and other practices had lapsed and come to an end as

we described earlier in this book, yet the basis, the teachings, and writings
on articles of faith, had remained pure and uncorrupted.
When the two brothers returned to Rumes they joyfully reported that
they had found the Gospel taught in its pure, true form. From this time on,
others went over to Alwinz, too, and worked there during the summer of
1756, mowing, reaping, and doing other field work. Some stayed for a
time with Joseph Kuhr, sleeping in his barn at night. On Sunday they went
to the meetinghouse, listened to the teachings and sermons, read and
searched in the writings, and found them in full agreement with the
Gospel. They were now fully convinced, their consciences were at peace,
and they resolved to leave the Lutheran religion and to accept the true
Christian faith.
They began to separate themselves from the Lutheran church. They
no longer attended its services, but in their homes they read eagerly from
the Bible and the books given to them by the brothers at Alwinz. Among
these books were some early writings such as the printed Confession of
Our Doctrine and Faith by Peter Ridemann and a little book written as a
defense against an indictment of the Hutterian Brethren issued at Worms,
in 1557. In this little book, the false doctrine of the Lutheran church was
strongly attacked, and its errors and deceptions brought clearly to light.
The truth about baptism, the Lord's Supper, oaths, and other points of faith
was explained, together with its basis in Holy Scripture. *
The Lutheran pastor in Rumes saw that some of the newcomers kept
apart and no longer came to church to listen to his preaching. He
summoned them and asked the reason. They did not mince words but told
him frankly all that they found at fault in his church and congregation.
When he was unable to win them back on the basis of Holy Scripture,
and nothing else could persuade them, anger, hatred, and hostility toward
them flared up among the Lutherans.
***************

1755 Brothers defend decision to join the Hutterian Brethren
The pastor at Rumes at once informed the city council in
Hermannstadt that some of the immigrants had joined the Anabaptists at
Alwinz, had gone over to their sect, and now refused to listen to his advice
and instruction.
On hearing this, the councilmen took the matter up at once and sent
the district sheriff from Reissmarkt and the pastor from Grosspold to
Alwinz (as the people from Rumes were now working in this village). The
sheriff arrived in Alwinz and called the immigrants to him. When they
were assembled he asked what they were doing there.
They told him, We came here to work and earn a little for our food.
The sheriff then asked, Where do you go to church?
Here with these German people, they replied. They teach the Gospel
in all its purity and plainness.
The sheriff said, You cannot have the Lord's Supper here, for these
people belong to a different sect.
They answered, According to the teachings of the Holy Scriptures,
better than with the Lutherans
The sheriff was horrified by what he heard. He and the Lutheran
pastor began to plead with them in a kind and friendly way, urging and
imploring them to accept advice, leave such heresy alone, and remain in
the Lutheran faith that they had already accepted.
Neither pleading nor threats moved them. By God's grace they
remained steadfast, refusing to forsake God and his truth. Although they
were beginners and not grounded deeply enough, God gave them words to
speak in defense of their faith. The sheriff and pastor grew angry when
they could not make the immigrants obey. They ordered them to leave
Alwinz, saying that if any stayed with the Anabaptists after receiving this
order, they must reckon with the consequences. The sheriff listed each

immigrant's name and went to Hermannstadt to inform the authorities of
what he had done.
A few days later, the newcomers still had not moved away.
Consequently, the Roman Catholic bishop who was the manorial lord of
Alwinz expelled our forefathers from his estates. He summoned brother
Joseph Kuhr, a servant of the Word in the community. Joseph went to him
accompanied by Andreas Wurz, Hans Kleinsasser, and Georg Waldner.
They gave their names and were admitted to the bishop's room. He asked
Joseph if he were the minister at Alwinz, and when Joseph said he was, the
bishop said, As your manorial lord, I forbid you to give these people work,
lodging, or overnight shelter.
Brother Joseph requested permission to speak. When this was granted
he said, If you had come into a strange land and no one would take you in,
wouldn't you find it very hard? The bishop said, I am lord of this manor. I
have the right to say what is to happen on my property.
Brother Joseph replied, Yes, you are the lord of this manor, but the
earth and all that is in it belongs to the Lord, and the Lord commands us to
be hospitable, to do good to the poor and needy, and readily invite them
into our homes.
The bishop was either unable or unwilling to answer. He turned to the
other brothers and said, I order you not to trespass on my property again.
If ever I catch one of you on my land, I will have him imprisoned. With
this he dismissed them'
They realized that he was in earnest, and the Elder at Alwinz, Märtl
Roth, advised the Carinthians to leave, for otherwise both they and the
brothers might come into difficulties. So they left Alwinz and returned to
Rumes.
They had only just moved out when Treitler, the inspector for
immigrants, arrived from Hermannstadt the next day to see if any of them
were still there. As he found no one he went on to Rumes to threaten and
intimidate those who had been at Alwinz. Two lords from Szaszvaros
accompanied him and they interrogated the immigrants, asking, Why did

you go to Alwinz and join the Anabaptist sect when you have the pure
Gospel in the Lutheran church?
(Although our forefathers had not received water baptism at this
point, we may well call them brothers because they had already received
the most important baptism, that of the Holy Spirit and of blood. They
were firmly resolved to suffer every trial and persecution for the sake of
divine truth, even bodily death, if the Lord should require it of them.)
Mathies Hofer was the first to answer. He said, The teachings your
ministers give the people are tainted and falsified by human ideas and in
many particulars contrary to the clear words of the Gospel. Besides this,
people in the Lutheran churches live evil, godless lives.
The lords replied, What we have is the true Word of God, the Holy
Scriptures, the Bible translated into German from the original Hebrew and
Greek by the inspired man of God, Dr. Martin Luther. Or do you think this
is untrue and tainted?
Brother Mathies said, The Bible itself is clear enough, but the
interpretations given by your ministers are false and misleading. That is
why such fruits come of it, for cursing, swearing, lying, robbery,
fornication, and adultery are commonly reported as taking place in your
Lutheran churches.
They did not have a good answer for this, and so began in smooth and
friendly-sounding words to beg and encourage our forefathers to swear
allegiance to the empress and to return to the Lutheran faith. They started
to belittle the church at Alwinz, speaking contemptuously of the dull,
unrefined way the services were held, without any beautiful ceremonies.
At burials there was neither preaching nor singing, but the body was just
buried as one might bury a dog. No one was given a title of respect such as
wise, right reverend, or most high. The Anabaptists even declared that no
flesh from Christ's body was present [at the Lord's Supper]. The lords told
them these and other things, expecting to turn the Carinthians against the
Hutterian brothers.

Even though they were young and weak in faith, they were not
brought into doubt, fear, or confusion, for God gave them words and
wisdom so that neither the magistrates nor the priests could shake their
resolve.
Treitler set out for Szaszvaros with the other two lords. As he was
leaving Alwinz, he ordered the justice of the peace to send four brothers
after him. Those named were brother Andreas Wurz, Joseph Müller,
Mathies Hofer, and Martin Angerman. The justice of the peace informed
them that they must appear in Szaszvaros. This they obediently did, going
the following day even though they knew that chains and imprisonment
probably awaited them if they refused to receive instruction from the
pastors.
***************

1756 Carinthian brothers persecuted
In Szaszvaros, the four brothers had to appear one at a time before
Treitler from Hermannstadt, the commissar, and two Lutheran pastors,
who expected to make them recant.
They first took brother Andreas Wurz and tried in various ways to
lead him astray. But he remained steadfast and did not deviate one hair's
breadth from the truth God had shown him. When his questioners saw that
he was not to be moved they ordered the guards to put him in irons and
imprison him in the church. These orders were carried out.
Next they took Martin Angerman. He was terrified of hardships,
bondage, and imprisonment; out of fear of men he denied the truth and
promised to attend the Lutheran church. He was released and, allowed to
return home.
The two remaining brothers, Joseph Müller and Mathies Hofer, each
had a separate hearing, and many efforts were made to coerce them. Since
they did not waver, they, too, were put in irons and imprisoned in the

church. All three were now together - a great joy for them, for they could
pray, sing, read, and encourage one another in the Lord.
The Lutherans expected that force and cruelty would frighten them
into giving up their faith and so would bring them back to the Lutheran
side. But the brothers' faith grew stronger and more certain under these
attacks, for the Holy Scripture shows that men must go through many
hardships to reach God's kingdom, that all who want to find salvation and
eternal life in Christ Jesus must first suffer persecution, and that those
who want to be true servants of God must be prepared to fight temptation.
Now they had proof that they were on the right way, because the same
things were being done to them as have been done to all faithful followers
of Christ throughout the centuries.
As for the Lutherans, they were revealing their true nature very
clearly. It was obvious from their actions that they did not live according
to the Gospel (as they dishonestly claimed to do), for they persecuted the
believers, using bonds and imprisonment to force their faith on others,
which neither Christ nor his apostles ever did.
The three brothers had been imprisoned in the church in Szaszvaros
for two weeks when a Lutheran pastor came and began disputing with
them about government authority and the Lord's Supper. The brothers told
him that God does not institute the law for the righteous. In speaking of
the Lord's Supper they referred to Christ's words in John 6, The flesh is of
no avail (meaning eating the flesh); the words which I have spoken to you
are both spirit and life. To this the preacher responded, That isn't in my
Bible. He made this very ill-considered statement in order to shame the
brothers. But when they showed him the passage, he was the one covered
with shame, since he, a scholar and preacher, did not know what was
written in the Bible, not even in the New Testament. He went away with a
burning face.
Soon after the preacher had left, the smith came with his tools; he
unshackled the brothers' feet and put other chains on them. Meanwhile,
night had fallen. A wagon was brought and the brothers had to sit on it
with their hands shackled as well. When it was almost midnight they were

taken from Szasvaros secretly, to prevent anyone knowing of it. What
grieved them most was that they could not take leave of their friends and
relatives and did not know where they were going. But they did not waver
in their faith even though their flesh shrank with fear.
They were taken from Szaszvaros to Deva and put in a dark dungeon
in the castle. After two weeks their imprisonment was made less severe.
They were transferred to a room where they were guarded day and night.
This lasted for seven weeks. *
The other brothers and sisters remained at Rumes over the summer,
working at their crafts to support themselves as best they could.
In October 1756, they were moved from Rumes to Grosspold. The
empress had had new houses built there. Each head of a family was to be
given his own separate house and was promised arable land and meadows
as well if he would accept instruction and attend the Lutheran church. The
Hermannstadt City Council impressed on the pastor from Grosspold, who
had already had a disputation with the Carinthians at Alwinz, that he
should do his utmost to win these people back to Lutheranism.
Meanwhile, the three brothers imprisoned at Deva were taken back to
Szaszvaros, then to Mühlbach, and from there to Reissmarkt, where they
were brought before the sheriff. ** Their feet were unshackled, and three
days later he told them to rejoin their wives and children and other
relatives and friends in Grosspold (although these relatives and friends did
not arrive in Grosspold until several days after the brothers). So after
twelve weeks in prison, they were released without a stain on their
consciences. Once the group was together and had been a few days in
Grosspold, the pastor sent for them and made new efforts to lead them
away from the true faith and back to the Lutheran church. But (praise be to
God!) he could do nothing. God, who is strong in the weak, stood
faithfully at his people's side so that the parson could not make one of
them recant however much he wanted to do so. The brothers remained
together and of one mind, separating themselves from the Lutheran church
and its congregation. On Sunday they met at Andreas Wurz's house to
pray, read, and sing together.

The brothers from Alwinz had given them some books, and at the
Carinthian brothers' request they also passed on a written church prayer.
Brother Georg Waldner, or sometimes Andreas Wurz or Mathies Hofer,
led the prayer and read out the teachings. As they were without a servant
of the Word and were new and untaught in many things, they simply did
the best they could. They spent the winter in Grosspold in great material
poverty.
Near the beginning of 1757, brother Mathies Hofer and Rosina
Bichler returned to Alwinz. Mathies was employed by Careth Gentner as a
glaze painter, for he was a potter who could make white pottery ware.
Rosina herded cattle for Johannes Stahl and helped with household chores.
***
Mathies and Rosina spent nine weeks in Alwinz before the lords in
Hermannstadt discovered they were there and sent orders to the justice of
the peace that the two must be found and taken to the city prison. The
justice of the peace took up the case energetically, came to the community
with several assistants, and required the elders to hand over the two
persons named on his warrant from Hermannstadt. When the brothers
refused, he searched Careth Gentner's house. Mathies had hidden and
could not be found, so the justice decided to arrest Gentner and take him to
Hermannstadt in Mathies' place. As soon as Mathies heard this, he gave
himself up, for he did not want to bring another brother into difficulties.
Once the justice had secured Mathies, he and his assistants went to
Joseph Stahl's house and arrested Rosina. The two were first taken to the
castle to wait for an escort. Then Mathies' hands were bound behind his
back, and Rosina tied by one hand to him, and in this way they were
brought to Hermannstadt by two guards.
When they reached the town, they were taken directly to Treitler and
asked if they would recant and attend the Lutheran church. They refused in
a few simple words. They were therefore imprisoned in the penitentiary.
Back in Alwinz, Paul Tschetter, the father of Lorenz Tschetter, set out
for Grosspold immediately after Mathies and Rosina were taken away.
Still in his leather apron, for he was a smith, he went on foot to tell the

brothers that the two were now prisoners. He loved Mathies and Rosina
dearly and was full of sympathy for them.
Mathies' brother, Michel Hofer, was at Grosspold. On hearing what
had happened, he made his way straight to Hermannstadt and asked the
authorities for permission to see; Mathies. This was readily given, but he
was told that if he went into the prison he would not be let out again.
Michel ignored the threat and visited his brother in the penitentiary all the
same. He was allowed in, but not allowed out.
After a few weeks, Johannes Amlacher went to Hermannstadt to visit
the imprisoned brothers. The same thing happened to him. He was
welcome to go in for a visit, but then he had to remain. This showed
plainly enough the spirit of the Lutherans.
In the penitentiary the brothers, like all the prisoners, had to work
preparing wool and making blankets. Each had to do a fixed amount of
work daily and was expected to card seventy pounds or pluck one hundred
pounds of wool in a week. Each person was given a groschen and a piece
of bread daily for his support. On Saturday, the wool master, the overseer,
and the prison officer came to inspect the work, and each inmate had to
show what he had done. If anyone's work was a pound or more under
weight, the prison officer dealt him or her as many lashes as there were
pounds lacking.
While in prison, Mathies Hofer composed several songs in good
rhyme to tell of his experiences:

We were taken from the church and brought
As prisoners to Hermannstadt.
We suffered shame and mockery.
O God, we tell our grief to thee.

Locked in the penitentiary there,
Forced to work for a year and more,
We were given a groschen each day, and bread.
We do not complain. We were blessed by God.
We had to work there with blankets and wool,
A hundred pounds to pluck, or seventy to pull.
For each pound missing we got a blow
And were reviled as lazy and slow.

They went on working for a year, but then found in the Holy
Scriptures that it was unfitting to work in prison like offenders when their
imprisonment was for the sake of God's truth and not for wrongdoing.
They therefore refused work from the prison officer and in spite of
beatings, they could not be forced to do it anymore.
Brother Michel Hofer was little over a year in the penitentiary when
he fell asleep in the Lord. Rosina Bichler was set free with the assistance
of a well-known citizen who then employed her as a servant in his house.
Now I must return to my account of the others in Grosspold who, as
already described, had separated from the Lutheran fold and no longer
attended church, but held their own meetings and worship services.
The devil was furious that some wanted to escape from his kingdom,
and the Lutherans grew more and more hostile and full of hatred toward
the little group, which was thought to be setting itself up as better than
they.
The pastor (especially entrusted with their care by the Hermannstadt
City Council) did everything he could to mislead some of them and to tear

them away from the little flock. He summoned first this one, then that, to
his house. But he had no success, for it was impossible to prove on the
basis of Holy Scripture that they were wrong or mistaken, and the false
teaching and godless, impure life of the Lutheran churches were only too
plain to them.
When his efforts proved useless, the parson was consumed with anger
and resentment. He went to Hermannstadt and told the city council that
they could do what they liked with the obstinate people. He could do
nothing. They were far too stubborn.
The councilmen then met to discuss how to stop this group from
gathering and to destroy their unity.
***************

1757 Attempt to separate the brothers
They decided that a good and serviceable plan was to separate them
by sending them to different places. This plan was soon put into action.
On March 27, 1757, the sheriff came from Reissmarkt to inform them
of the move. They must pack up quickly, ready to be taken to another
place. An escort arrived with wagons for their transport, and after hasty
preparations the immigrants loaded their few poor possessions. They all
left Grosspold together, but once they reached the fields beyond the
village, the wagons began to separate as each driver turned to the road he
had been ordered to take.
Brother Andreas Wurz and his household were taken into the Medias
district to Eibesdorf; Joseph Müller to Bassen; Georg Gurl with his Lena
and with Valentin Resch to Gross-Alisch; and Georg Waldner with his wife
and children to Hahnendorf in the jurisdictional district of Schassburg.
Brother Hans Kleinsasser with his brothers, wife, and children were taken
past Hermannstadt, through Leschkirch to the village of Kreuz. Christian
Glanzer, with his brothers and his wife and children, was taken still further

away, along a turning on the right to the village of Stein in the Reps
district. With hearts full of grief, they had to leave one another, not
knowing where they would be taken, or whether they would ever see one
another again.
The Lutherans thought that by these means they would stifle and put
out the light of truth, but things did not happen as the godless oppressors
planned. By God's grace, the brothers and sisters learned one another's
whereabouts within ten days. They rejoiced at knowing which hamlet or
village each was in, and they thanked and praised God for it.
The man chiefly responsible for the separation was Treitler in
Hermannstadt, who was venting his rage against the brothers. God
punished him, for ten days later he was dead and so could not injure the
believers any longer.
In every place where the brothers had been brought, the parson of that
village had strict orders from Hermannstadt to take on responsibility for
these people and to ensure their attendance at church. The village was
ordered to allot fields and meadows to them as to all the other villagers.
But the brothers did not take over the allotted land, for their only thought
was how to move together once more, and they refused to be coerced into
attending the Lutheran church. In the meantime, they lived like pilgrims
and guests, accepting work for day wages when asked to do so, and
visiting each other from time to time. This continued for nearly one and a
half years.
During this period, three young sisters went into Hermannstadt and
wanted to use the opportunity to visit the brothers in prison. Two of them
were Andreas Wurz's daughters, Elizabeth and Christina; the other was
Anna Egerter. The official at the penitentiary did not want to allow them
in; he said they should go to Peter Hahnenheim for a permit. One of the
girls went to the aforesaid man and requested the permit. But it was just at
the time that the brothers in the penitentiary had refused to work, and
Peter Hahnenheim was very angry about it. He therefore wrote on the
permit that the prison officer should admit the girls to see the prisoners,
then refuse to let them go. The prison official obeyed, and that is why the
sisters were allowed in so easily. Afterwards, Peter Hahnenheim was sorry

for imprisoning such young girls who had done nothing wrong, and he
would have liked to release them, but by that time the matter was no
longer under his control. Their release will be described at the appropriate
place.
Brother Christian Nageler, who with Johannes Hofer had been taken
to Gross-Schenk, fell asleep in the Lord at this time. His widow, Dorothea,
went with her three daughters to join the brothers at Kreuz. Soon
afterward, brother Johannes Hofer also fell asleep in the Lord at GrossSchenk, and his widow moved with her children to Stein. About the same
time, Valentin Resch fell asleep in the Lord at Gross-Alisch and Johannes
Plattner at Hahnendorf. Stephanus Kleinsasser fell asleep in the Lord in
the very first year while they were still at Rumes.
On April 24, 1761, brother Georg Waldner and his wife and children
moved from Hahnendorf to brother Hans Kleinsasser at Kreuz. With them
went three single sisters, Christina and Elisabeth Winkler, and Elisabeth
Plattner. The move was made with the knowledge and permission of the
justice of the peace at Kreuz. Two months later, brother Georg Gurl and
his Lena came from Gross-Alisch to join them. Toward autumn of this
same year, in September, brother Joseph Müller with his wife and three
children moved to Kreuz from Baasen in the Medias district. Peter Müller,
who had been for a time with the brothers at Alwinz, now joined those at
Kreuz.
The villagers at Kreuz allowed them to come and at first were glad to
have them because they were reliable workers, although as time went on
the situation altered. The believers realized what great mercy God was
showing them by bringing them together to live in peace once more. They
thanked and praised him and were full of joy.
About this time, they refused to work for the Lutheran pastor and
explained their reasons by showing him passages from the printed
Confession of Faith.
***************

1762 Carinthians establish community
As more brothers and sisters gathered at Kreuz, they were led to
establish and maintain true Christian order for their practical and spiritual
life. They felt greatly in need of a teacher or Elder, so after consulting
together they sent two brothers to ask the community at Alwinz to help
them find a servant of the Word for the little flock now gathering at Kreuz.
The church could then be brought to a true order, in the same way as the
first apostolic church and as the church of God established in Moravia
through the faithful, spiritually gifted witness, Jakob Hutter. After talking
the question over, the church elders at Alwinz gave the following advice:
the brothers from Kreuz and Stein should meet and elect from their own
number the two or three who were most gifted for such an important task.
Then they should report back to Alwinz which of these had the most votes
and the elders would consider what to do next.
The brothers did as advised. They held a meeting at Stein, where two
names were put forward, those of Hans Kleinsasser and Veit Glanzer. Most
people spoke for Hans Kleinsasser. The elders at Alwinz were told of this,
but further action was delayed until the end of April 1762, when brother
Joseph Müller, Hans Kleinsasser, and Peter Müller traveled to Alwinz.
They asked the brothers there to help them go forward with this important
matter. On May 3, 1762, Hans Kleinsasser and Joseph Müller were
baptized (Peter Müller had already received baptism), and afterwards Hans
Kleinsasser was appointed to a time of testing. After the meetings, the
three brothers parted from those at Alwinz with heartfelt words and
returned in peace to the church at Kreuz.
Brother Hans Kleinsasser took up the task entrusted to him and
served faithfully, doing his utmost through the grace and gifts granted him
by God, so that the church at Kreuz was well satisfied with him. When he
had been tested nearly three quarters of a year and had proved himself
well, the brothers in Kreuz wrote to the elders at Alwinz and sent Peter
Müller to report. Without exception they could only witness that the
strength of the Holy Spirit was given to the chosen brother; God's
abundant grace and blessing was to be felt in him, and he received a good
testimony from the whole church.

In January 1763, brother Hans Kleinsasser, accompanied by Peter
Müller, went over from Kreuz to Alwinz, and was confirmed in the service
of the Word by the laying on of hands by the elders, Märtl Roth and Joseph
Kuhr. They instructed him in the most important and necessary matters:
about carrying out baptism, the Lord's Supper, Marriage, exclusion and
reacceptance, and about true order in the church. They also gave him
writings and teachings to help him. Peter Müller was instructed to give a
full account to the little group at Kreuz and to appoint brother Hans to his
service, and he fulfilled his task with zeal before the gathered church.
The whole community rejoiced to have a shepherd, teacher, and
leader - someone to encourage them in joyful dedication. They accepted
him with thanks and praise as a gift from God.
From that time on they began to order their life in a Christian way. On
July 26, 1763, thirteen men and women were baptized and entered the
Christian church through the covenant of grace.
The School Order was put into practice for the children's education,
and brother Georg Waldner was chosen to instruct them in reading and
writing, and also in Christ's teachings and all the articles of faith. Two
sisters, Christina and Elisabeth Winkler, were appointed to care for all the
practical needs of the children.
Brother Joseph Müller was appointed servant for temporal needs,
with brother Joseph Kleinsasser as his helper. Dorothea Nägeler served the
community in the kitchen. Some were asked to care for the community's
clothing. All the rest did other useful communal work, each according to
his ability. They stopped hiring themselves by the day to work for people
outside the community; they worked at spinning and cloth-making instead.
Every day, they gathered in unity of heart to pray and to praise God. If
anything wrong and sinful took place, it was earnestly disciplined. The
Lord also blessed his little flock by providing for their temporal needs.
They did not plant or harvest; they worked only at their daily tasks of
spinning and weaving. Yet God in his grace provided sufficiently for them,
and they had no need to beg at others' doors.

This is how God worked to build up his church community again.
Although there were few people and it looked a small and feeble attempt,
and although the world and the devil violently opposed it, God's plan could
not be thwarted. For this small beginning took place by God's special
providence to protect and save many souls, as is shown by subsequent
history.
***************

1765 Disunity/reunited in an unexpected way
Since 1761, however, the brothers at Stein and Eibesdorf had not
been at peace with the community at Kreuz. The disunity had been caused
by the following event: There were some young brothers among them who
wanted to marry, and they chose partners according to their own wishes
and preference. The brothers at Kreuz would not let the weddings go
forward because such self-willed Marriage was against the church's
Confession of Faith, which neither taught nor permitted one to choose for
oneself. The parents were to be asked, and the partner they suggested was
to be accepted with gratitude as a gift from God. The brothers from Stein
opposed this by referring to Paul's words.
When the arguments and quarreling had gone on for a long time and
the community at Kreuz could not give way and accept the procedure as
right, the brothers at Stein went ahead with the Marriages on their own,
against the advice and without the consent of the brothers at Kreuz.
Although their brotherhood, as well as that at Kreuz, had chosen brother
Hans Kleinsasser as teacher, they did not listen to him in this case.
Andreas Wurz from Eibesdorf took the matter in hand and united the
couples. There was a wedding and a festive meal.
The brothers at Kreuz could not agree that the group at Stein had
acted rightly. As the latter refused to admit they had been at fault but
insisted they were in the right, the brotherhood at Kreuz separated from
them and shunned them. This lasted for more than three years.

But God had delight and pleasure in the gathering of his people, and it
was his purpose to establish and build up his church, so he brought peace
and reuniting between the brothers at Kreuz, Stein, and Eibesdorf in an
unexpected way.
This is what occurred: In the spring of 1765, brother Peter Müller was
for some reason sent to Alwinz from the community at Kreuz. His shortest
way lay through Hermannstadt, but he left the usual route and went
through Medias. He stopped at Andreas Wurz's house in Eibesdorf and
persuaded him to go along to Alwinz. On the way they talked together
until at last they came to unity and shook hands. They parted in peace.
Andreas Wurz returned to Eibesdorf and Peter Müller came safely back to
Kreuz, bringing with him several wonderful books as a gift from the
brothers at Alwinz. He reported what was happening at Alwinz, but said
nothing about coming to peace with Andreas.
Two days later, during a mealtime, he happened to be asked where he
had spent the first night of his journey; when he named the village, he was
asked if he had gone by way of Medias. He said, Yes.
Then the brothers wanted to know, Did you by any chance stop at
Andreas Wurz's in Eibesdorff? Peter Müller again said, Yes.
This led to the further question, Did Andreas actually go with you to
Alwinz?
He answered, Yes
The brothers demanded, Didn't you know that we are not in peace
with Andreas Wurz and are therefore shunning him?
Peter replied, I cannot say that Andreas thinks any differently than we
do. He had scriptural basis for all he said, and I felt no need to contradict
him or change his views on anything. That is why we made peace with one
another and were reconciled.
Peter's words were not well received. The brothers told him, It is
impossible for us to be at peace with you. The brotherhood cannot ignore

what you did. We did not send you to Eibersdorf, and you will not be
considered at peace with the church until you can prove that Andreas Wurz
obeys what is right.
When Peter saw he had misjudged the situation, he admitted his
mistake. But he was not altogether daunted, for he hoped very much that
Andreas would be willing to listen, so he said to the brothers, I will go
back to Andreas and speak with him. If he keeps to what he said in our
previous talk, I have good hope that he will unite with us. If he changes
and says something different, I will tell him I am not united with him and
our reconciliation no longer holds. And I will gladly take on myself
whatever the church requires me to bear for my guilt. But I would like to
ask that another brother come to Hermannstadt, too; then I will bring
Andreas to meet him and we can talk together so that you yourselves hear
what he says.
The brothers agreed to this suggestion and brother Georg Waldner
was chosen to go to Hermannstadt to see how things went between
Andreas and Peter.
So Peter Müller called on Andreas Wurz in Eibesdorf, explained why
he had come, and told Andreas he should accompany him to
Hermannstadt. Andreas Wurz did not want to comply, and he rejected the
proposal. Peter Müller challenged him sharply, insisting that he should
come, for there was no other course. If you refuse to come, I shall know
from my own experience of your behavior that you are as disobedient as
people say.
This frank speaking finally moved Andreas to agree to accompany
Peter. They traveled to Hermannstadt and went to the imprisoned brothers
and sisters. Georg Waldner also met with them and they talked together
about the separation between the communities. Although they did not
reach complete agreement, Andreas Wurz promised to go to the brothers
at Stein and bring them to Kreuz for further talks about the question. If
possible they would fully unite with the brothers from Kreuz.
They parted in good hope of finding peace with one another. Andreas
Wurz kept faithfully to his promise. He took his son-in-law Johannes

Hofer with him and went to the brothers at Stein, telling them about the
meetings and talks with Peter Müller and that they were considering
uniting with the church community at Kreuz. They won over the brothers
at Stein, and Martin and Veit Glanzer accompanied them to the
brotherhood at Kreuz.
When the four arrived, they talked with the brothers about the
division between them. But after a great deal of arguing, with each side
insisting their own opinion was right, it almost seemed as if nothing would
come of the uniting. They had, in fact, already parted; Andreas Wurz and
his son-in-law were setting out for Eibesdorf, the other two for Stein, when
Andreas turned around and said, Let us submit completely and think of
nothing but making peace. We are the only brothers in Transylvania, and
can't the few of us be united?
The three returned to Kreuz with him. Andreas told the brothers there,
We have changed our minds. We want to accept your correction and unite
with you.
The brothers were well-satisfied by what he said, and the four then
acknowledged and confessed their fault and gave all honor to God.
Admitting they were guilty of acting wrongly, they humbled themselves
before God and the church. Then the brotherhood reaccepted them and
united with them. Together with brother Hans Kleinsasser, they went to the
imprisoned brothers and sisters in Hermannstradt and united with them,
too. This took place on June 16, 1765. All the brothers and sisters on both
sides rejoiced about the uniting. They praised and thanked God for
intervening in a wonderful way and bringing everything to the longed-for
goal.
At the uniting, all the brothers came to a unanimous decision that
those from Stein should move to Kreuz - a few at a time, because the
village would never have tolerated their arriving together. First of all, the
children moved in twos and threes to Kreuz to attend school there, and as
time went on, several brothers and sisters followed. Similarly, brother
Andreas Wurz, who was still living in Eibesdorf, began to sell his goods,
and that autumn, on October 13, he moved with his wife and children to
the community at Kreuz. Not long afterward, he was appointed by the

church to the service of stewardship, and he faithfully served the whole
church in that position until the end of his life.
As was recounted earlier, the persecuted believers from Alwinz came
to the church at Kreuz in the same autumn.
***************

1763 Lutherans attempt to convert brothers
Because the number of believers was increasing in the village, the
enmity of Satan and his children flared up against them in a violent
outburst. Although the brothers earned their livelihood by honest work and
were no burden at all, the devil could not endure them and, to put it
shortly, there was no place for them anywhere. The group of believers
separated themselves from the world and its ungodly life; they entered
neither church nor inn, stood out against wrongdoing, errors, and false
teaching, and pointed to God's judgment. All this was intolerable to Satan
and his children. They began to rave and rage, and wanted to destroy and
root out by force the gathering of believers. I will give a short account of
this later, but first I must go back two years.
In September of 1763, brother Hans Kleinsasser went into
Hermannstadt and visited the brothers and sisters imprisoned in the
penitentiary. When he returned home he brought news of government
decisions for dealing with the gathering of believers: Now that the Holy
Roman empress had made peace with the king of Prussia (after a war
lasting seven years), the authorities wanted to purge the land of heresy.
The Lutheran clergy were to make one more effort to convert the
Hutterites from their heretical errors to the true faith. If the Lutherans had
no success, the task was to be handed over to the Roman Catholic priests.
If the priests could do nothing, expulsion and perpetual exile from the
country must follow for all such stiff necked, disobedient heretics.
Soon afterward, in November, an order came from the authorities at
Hermannstadt for the pastor at Kreuz to summon the brothers to a hearing,

cross-examine them about their faith and if possible, to convert them. A
senior pastor and another parson from the district were sent to assist him.
A list of questions based on 30 articles had been prepared, and the brothers
had to state their beliefs.
First Hans Kleinsasser with his brothers, wife, and children had to
appear at the parsonage and were given a hearing. The dean asked each one
for name and age, and each had to speak in reply. The pastor from Kreuz
wrote it all down. The parson sent by the government also sat at the table,
listening to everything. When all the names and ages were recorded, the
dean began to ask questions about the articles of faith. The brothers had to
answer questions on every article, and they spoke truthfully as God the
Lord lent them grace. Then the parson from Kreuz asked if they intended
to hold to their testimony, warning them that it would be forwarded to
high-up heads of state. The brothers replied that they believed their
testimony to be the divine truth, and they intended with God's help to live
and die by it. They would wait in patience for whatever God permitted to
happen to them. After this, they were allowed to return home.
Brother Georg Waldner and his family were summoned for a hearing
next and were treated just as the first brothers had been.
Brother Joseph Müller, Georg Gurl, and Peter Müller with their
families were called third for interrogation. All steadily confessed to the
truth and refused to be misled even when the false prophets used smooth
and friendly words to try to make them renounce their faith.
The same procedure was followed with the brothers in Stein, with the
prisoners in the penitentiary, and with Andreas Wurz in Eibesdorf. A
record of their answers was sent to the authorities in Hermannstadt.
***************

1767 Jesuit sent to convert the community

After these hearings, the case was handed over to the Roman
Catholics. The members of the city council and of the Transylvania
Council in Hermannstadt were part Lutheran, part Catholic. But the
Catholics received preference over the Lutherans and a man who wanted
high office adopted their faith. At the beginning of 1764, about February,
the Catholics sent a Jesuit to convert the community at Kreuz. When he
arrived in the village, he stayed overnight with the justice of the peace.
The following day, the brothers were summoned by the justice to appear
before this false prophet. The Jesuit at once began to dispute with them,
trying with his smooth and cunning talk to make them lose faith. The
brothers contradicted his untrue, misleading teaching. They spoke honestly
and fearlessly in front of everyone.
Although there was no reasonable hope of gaining anything, the Jesuit
again came in person to the community on the next day and went into the
rooms where the children were gathered for school. Here the false prophet
began once more to praise the Roman Catholic faith in glowing terms,
thinking in his folly that they would all let themselves be immediately
deceived and misled by his empty, boastful prattle. But God stood
faithfully by his people, and gave them words and wisdom to refute the
false teachings. The Jesuit could get nowhere, but had to stop, disgraced.
The whole house was full of people, Saxons and other citizens of Kreuz,
the justice of the peace, and many more who all heard how the brothers
refuted the false prophet with God's Word, on a scriptural foundation.
Finally, he began to ask people in a friendly way to do as he told them
and accept his advice and instruction. He said something like this: If you
do not obey and embrace the Roman Catholic faith, I assure you that you
will be sorry for it on the Last Day when God tells you, 'You were sent a
Roman Catholic priest who tried to teach and guide you. But you would
not listen to him. Therefore depart from me, you etc....' When no one was
influenced in the slightest by his pleading, he added, The Transylvanian
Council in Hermannstadt has decided that if you refuse to recant, action
will be taken within six weeks and you will be expelled from the country.
The brothers response was, God's will be done. Nothing can happen to us
unless God permits it.

The Jesuit traveled on from Kreuz to Stein, where he did his utmost
to mislead at least some, but could win no one over and so could only
withdraw, blushing with shame, from his fruitless attempt.
***************

1767 Cruelly mistreated and banished
When the authorities saw how steadfast and determined the brothers
were, they resolved to banish them from the country. All preparations were
made. The only thing lacking was the commanding general's orders to
round them up and expel them. Undoubtedly this would have happened if
God had not ordained otherwise. God's purpose was first to bring together
the brothers at Kreuz, Stein, and Eibesdorf and unite them in spirit, then
through them to preserve and save a number of God-fearing souls from
Alwinz who were chosen for eternal life. It was therefore his will for them
to stay longer in the land.
The expulsion was delayed and to some extent prevented by the Jesuit
Delphini at Alwinz. He planned to force everyone in Alwinz to accept the
Roman Catholic faith, and only then to attack the church at Kreuz. He
would certainly have had his way if the people had not been snatched from
his hands and his purpose foiled by unexpected means, as is described in
the following pages.
Some account has already been given of the difficulties and
opposition suffered by the community at Kreuz on behalf of the brothers
and sisters at Alwinz, also of the visit Delphini made to the church at
Kreuz and of his actions there. All these events happened about this time.
When brothers and sisters fled again and again from the oppression at
Alwinz and sought refuge with the church community at Kreuz, the Jesuit
always had them fetched back. The villagers at Kreuz had to provide the
wagons to transport them. To compensate themselves for their trouble the
villagers seized and carried off about a thousand tiles, some linen, and

other goods from the community. The believers bore this in patience,
leaving their cause to the Judge who is just and righteous.
The godless people harassed and harmed the innocent in other ways,
as, for example, a marshal was sent to Kreuz from the government at
Hermannstadt to arrest the fugitives from Alwinz and bring them back to
their original village. This man was a merciless tyrant, and therefore was
often selected for such tasks. The people from Alwinz did not give
themselves up voluntarily; they hid among the members of the Kreuz
community, who refused to betray them. Then this marshal recognized one
of the young boys, Johannes Stahl's son. He grabbed hold of him and
forced the boy to go in front of him through all the rooms in search of his
mother. When the boy refused to go into a room, the marshal lashed him
hard across the back with a leather whip. His mother could not endure
seeing her son punished any longer, and she gave herself up.
On another occasion, the marshal cruelly mistreated brother Hans
Kleinsasser, the church Elder, who had protested against this brutality to
innocent people. He ordered the Elder's hands to be bound behind his back,
took him out into the street, and tied him to a horse as if to bring him
prisoner to Hermannstadt. Fastened like this, Hans was forced to run
beside the horse for part of the way, until at last the official released him.
During this unhappy period, which lasted nearly three years, the
villagers at Kreuz often petitioned the authorities at Hermannstadt to send
away the people now coming to their village, for more and more kept
arriving. Although the believers did no harm to anyone, the villagers
would not tolerate their influx: the old serpent's malice was too great.
With many gifts and continual petitions therefore, the village people
prevailed on the authorities to let them wreak their fury on the believers.
On August 10, 1767, the same marshal came to Kreuz, sent by the
Hermannstadt City Council with orders to remove every unauthorized
person from the village. The justice of the peace immediately summoned
the Elder and one other brother to appear before the marshal, who told
them that on the following day all brothers were to stay at home and not
leave their houses, for he had an order from the city council to read to
them. He sent the two brothers back to the community without disclosing

the purpose of his coming visit, but the brothers gathered from others a
clear enough idea of his reasons and intentions. So all the brothers and
sisters prepared to wait patiently and to bear whatever God, their faithful
and loving Father, would permit the godless people to do to the church
community.
The following morning, August 11, the marshal came accompanied
by all the officials and elders of the village, with Justice Hahn as arbitrator
and with bailiffs and constables and citizens and many peasants, all
pushing into the community in an arrogant, aggressive way. The justice of
the peace first read out a stern order from the city council: All who had
moved to Kreuz from other places must leave the village immediately. If
the said people would not obey voluntarily, then force would be used
against them.
The brothers replied, We cannot and will not obey, for it is against
God, against our faith and consciences to stop gathering in community and
separate from each other.
At this answer, the peasants began rampaging as if they meant to tear
houses, farm buildings, and everything else to the ground. They broke the
ovens and tore out the distilleries, until the justice of the peace restrained
them by saying, We have no orders to destroy homes and buildings, only to
drive away the people who have moved in. His words made them stop their
uproar.
Then the brothers from other places were asked once more whether
they would move from Kreuz or not. Brother Georg Waldner was the first
to reply. He said briefly, No, I am not going to move.
Immediately the marshal ordered the peasants standing near, Seize
him! Before the words were out of his mouth, the men took hold of Georg,
flung him to the ground, tied his hands behind him so tightly that his
fingers turned purple, and dragged him through the gate into the street. He
was held fast by the rope and guarded by several peasants.
Meanwhile, the justice strongly advised the others to go into the
street. If they refused to obey, they would be flogged and beaten and would

still have to go in the end. Christian Hofer said he would not go away and
separate from the church of his own free will. This was at once reported to
the marshal. Christian was a young brother, eighteen years old, and the
marshal was beside himself with rage that such a youngster should oppose
and disobey him. In his fury, he gripped Christian by the hair, threw him to
the ground, and rolled him over several times. Then he ordered him to be
taken out and tied to the other brother.
The same happened to Christian's sixteen-year-old brother, Paul
Hofer, when he, too, refused to go of his own accord. The bully grabbed
him by the hair, jerked him violently back and forth, hit him several times
with a stick, and dragged him out through the gateway.
Afterward, as the peasants knew which brothers came from other
places, they drove all the rest of these from the yard. Any who did not go
willingly were forcibly removed. Once they were outside, the peasants
hemmed them in to guard them and compelled them to go as far as the
churchyard, where they shut them inside the enclosing wall - about fortysix in all.
Here they were separated. Each had to return from where he had
come. The brothers, sisters, and children from Stein were sent on a wagon
with a two-man escort to Stein. Brother Georg Waldner with his household
was sent to Hahnendorf, and Dorothea Nägeler with her three daughters to
Gross-Schenk.
Joseph Müller and Andreas Wurz and their households (although
Andreas was not at home at the time) were sent to Eibesdorf and Bassen
by the Medias road. Georg Gurl, an old, bent man, was sent with his Lena
to Gross-Alisch. There was no pitying or sparing the old, sick, or crippled.
All were treated alike: they must all be taken off, and no one might remain
on the place except Hans Kleinsasser and his two brothers who had
originally been brought there from Grosspold.
To men's eyes, it looked as if the community with its gathering of
believers was now rooted out and destroyed. The enemies of God were
delighted and said to each other, That's the end of them. But the outcome
was not as they expected.

Brother Hans Kleinsasser and his brothers were deeply grieved and
troubled to have to watch such ruthless violence used on their fellow
believers and beloved brothers and sisters, who had caused no harm to
anyone. They had only withdrawn from the world and its society and lived
together in peace and unity. Yet this had roused the devil and his children
to fury. In hate and envy he used the angry crowd to drive out and scatter
the faithful until it was thought they would never come together again. The
ungodly people spoke as David quotes in Psalms: Come, away with them,
let them be a nation no longer, let Israel's name be remembered no more.
(Psalm 83:4)
Undoubtedly, if the community and gathering of believers had not
been brought together by God, and if the hearts of the faithful had not
therefore been bound together by love, their scattering would really have
proved a final blow at that place and time, since natural man lives
according to the flesh and does not care or strive for community and selfsurrender. He thinks only of himself and is bent on his own interest, not
the cause of Christ.
***************

1767 The scattered people gathered again
But the brothers and sisters who had been forcibly scattered had one
resolve in their hearts: as soon as they could, they would gather at Kreuz
again in spite of the opposition, threats, and commands of ungodly people.
At Hahnendorf brother Georg Waldner fearlessly told the marshal to his
face that he, Georg, would stay only as long as he was chained. The bully
flew into a rage, cursed and swore horribly, and punched Georg hard
several times. The brother bore the abuse in patience, lifted up his hands,
and thanked God for finding him worthy to suffer a little for the divine
truth. Once the marshal had gone on his way to Hermannstadt, Georg
Waldner and his household took the road to Kreuz and arrived three days
later. Those who had been transported in the direction of Medias also
arrived in Kreuz late on the same day as the Waldners.

Dorothea Nägeler was sent back from Gross-Schenk by the village
officials. The peasants who escorted her there had to take her back again,
for the Kreuz officials had failed to supply them with a written order from
the higher authorities at Hermannstadt, and the officials at Gross-Schenk
maintained it was not the Kreuz officials' business to give them orders.
The brothers from Stein also returned little by little to Kreuz, and by
God's merciful leading nearly everyone was back within a week. All the
brothers and sisters were very joyful, and exulted with praise and thanks to
God for bringing them together once more.
The Kreuz officials soon discovered what was happening, and the
justice of the peace arrived with several other people to demand what they
meant by coming back again. He ordered them in strong terms to assemble
in the churchyard or else leave the village. They told him they absolutely
refused to separate: they would rather remain together, waiting in patience
for whatever God would allow for them. So about thirty people were
arrested and imprisoned in the churchyard. At the same time the officials
assured them that if they would consent to move away from Kreuz they
would be released.
The justice of the peace then informed the authorities at
Hermannstadt that the people he had removed were all back in Kreuz
again, and he had arrested them and locked them up. What, he asked,
should he do with them now? He was told to keep them locked up pending
further instructions.
***************

1767 Joseph Kuhr and Johannes Stahl's journey back to the
community
On August 27, 1767, brother Joseph Kuhr and Johannes Stahl arrived
at the community in Kreuz and were welcomed with great joy. There is an
account earlier in this book of the sufferings endured by these two dear

brothers while fettered and imprisoned for their faith, also of their
expulsion from the country. Now I will record a little of what happened to
them on their journey through Poland, Moldavia, and Wallachia.
On the third day after leaving the mountains, they reached a small
market town in Poland. Here they tried to find work and lodging for the
winter, since they were very poor and, as can be imagined, had almost no
food and clothing.
When they were unable to find any possibilities in the town, a woman
advised them to go to Zaleshchiki, where the King of Poland had built a
cloth factory. Many Germans were there, she said, and they would find
plenty of work. Setting out as directed, the two brothers crossed the frozen
River Dniester and reached Zaleshchiki on St. Nicholas' Day. While they
were in the market place, the police sergeant came out of the town hall and
asked them who they were. They told him they had been exiled from
Transylvania for the sake of their faith. For three weeks they had been
moving from one place to another as pilgrims and strangers in this foreign
country, and now they were looking for a lodging and for some possibility
of work during the winter. On hearing of their plight, the police sergeant
was full of sympathy. Come with me, he said, took them to a German
innkeeper, and asked him to give the brothers lodging. He paid for a drink
of brandy, too. The innkeeper willingly accepted them, and they found
employment as well. But all the noise and bustle at the inn disturbed the
brothers' rest when they were tired from their work, and so they looked for
different accommodation.
Brother Joseph spent the winter chopping wood. Brother Johannes
hired himself out to a clothmaker.
When springtime came they left Zaleshchiki on May 15, 1767, and
traveled by way of Moldavia and Wallachia, through Botosani, Jasch,
Focsani, Bucharest and Crajova. They stopped for a time at some of these
places, working for people in order to earn money for their expenses on
the road. They also asked about freedom of religion in the country, for in
Moldavia, Tartary, and Wallachia everyone was free to practice his own
religion. What was more, Germans were not required to pay taxes and
tribute. *

In Crajova they spent a week looking for someone to guide them over
the mountains into Transylvania. They were directed to a village called
Benschiest, where they met many Wallachians from Transylvania and
stayed with them for two weeks. Among them they found three who were
willing to take them. They agreed to a payment of three gulden, then set
out together on the wild, dangerous crossing and came safely over the
Wallachian and Transylvanian mountains. **
Once in Transylvania, they could not travel openly for brother Joseph
was well-known far and wide in the area. Nearing Kreuz, they met a
Wallachian acquaintance who said Now, Joseph, where have you been?
Joseph replied, Don't waste time asking where I've come from; give me
some bread instead! For they had not had anything to eat that day. The
Wallachian at once pulled some bread from his pocket and gave them all
he had.
So they came to Alwinz by night and went together to the house of
Michel Kuhr, Joseph's son. Michel, however, had recanted and become a
Roman Catholic, and since brother Johannes Stahl heard that his wife and
children were with the community at Kreuz and Stein, the two brothers did
not stay in Alwinz. They had a little to eat and left that same night,
arriving in Kreuz on August 27, as stated above. The community
welcomed them with tremendous joy.
***************

1767 Delphini's attempt to take the community's children
Meanwhile, the brotherhood had heard of the terrible plan of
Delphini, that murderer of souls. After the Jesuit's attempt in the previous
year 1766 to destroy the church at Kreuz and Stein, he soon realized that
the methods he had used at Alwinz would not be successful here: he would
have to use still stronger measures. He therefore made up his mind to take
the community's children by force and put them in the orphanage at
Hermannstadt, while incarcerating the adults in different prisons. Those he

could not intimidate into denying the truth and deserting their faith, he
would exile from the country as he had exiled Joseph Kuhr and Johannes
Stahl. But it is obviously not left to the wolves to decide whether sheep
should live or not, so it was not in the Jesuit's power to wreak the violence
of his heart on the Lord's little lambs. God the Lord stood in his way and
defeated his purpose, for the authorities at Hermannstadt would not
consent to his cruelty without a direct command from the imperial
government, and they refused to implement his plans.
At this, the infamous Delphini started out for Vienna to see the
empress. He took with him the unfaithful Märtl Roth, who had been Elder
at Alwinz. They stopped in Sabatisch on the way in order to visit Zacharias
Walter and the newly converted (or rather recently misled) Christians. As
a result, negotiations were prolonged until well into 1767. Once Delphini
had received complete power and freedom to root out the Anabaptists, he
returned to Hermannstadt in August. When he showed the imperial order
to the authorities, the lords of the council could no longer oppose him. The
mayor of Hermannstadt wrote a letter to the justice of the peace at Kreuz,
ordering him to keep his prisoners in safe custody. A Roman Catholic
priest would arrive shortly, and he would deal with them. A house should
be prepared for him and he should be given all the help and support he
asked for.
As the village refused to tolerate us living together, the brothers had
to think about what they should do: If it was God's will, they would move
to some other place or leave the country. But they had not known where to
go. On hearing that their little, defenseless children were to be taken from
them, and to be baptized and brought up in the Roman Catholic faith, they
felt all the more that they could not delay, and grew still more concerned
to find a way to flee before the authorities could act. Nevertheless they
first gave the question very careful consideration, laying it before God and
searching the Lord's Word to learn whether they might take this step with a
good conscience or whether it was against God. In the Lord's words they
found the freedom to flee from oppression without harm to their
consciences, for Christ and his apostles had also withdrawn, and the angel
of the Lord had said to Joseph in a dream, Rise up, take the child and his

mother, escape with them to Egypt, and stay there until I tell you; for
Herod is going to search for the child to destroy him. (Matthew 2:13)
***************

1767 Preparations for the secret flight
At that time, too, the fiery dragon was trying to find the bride and
companion of Christ and to eat her children. Christ said to his disciples,
When you are persecuted in one town, take refuge in another. So the little,
persecuted flock was resolved to save their innocent children by flight
whenever God gave them a way. (Revelation 12:6; Matthew 10:23)
Just at this time, God brought our two dear brothers, Joseph Kuhr and
Johannes Stahl, back to us, and almost the first words brother Andreas
Wurz said to them were: Now brother Joseph, have you come to lead us
out of here?
Brother Joseph replied, Yes, brother Andreas, if it is God's will.
Then the two brothers reported that in Moldavia and Wallachia there
was land, places to live, and freedom in plenty. The Wallachians, who
made up the bulk of the population, belonged to the Greek Catholic
religion. In the towns and villages lived Greeks, Jews, Armenians, and in
some places Philippeners.
Nobody was harassed or coerced on account of religious beliefs. The
country was subject to the Turkish sultan, who appointed the princes. It
was a hot and fertile land and produced very fine wine. But few people
lived there, so in some parts great stretches of land lay wild and
uncultivated. There were ample pastures, meadows, and croplands, as
much as anyone could wish. The brothers described how they had once
met a man on the road whom they had greeted and asked why he was out
in the deserted countryside all alone. He told them he was a shepherd. The
brothers asked, If you are a shepherd, where are your sheep? He pointed

out his sheep, which were grazing in such deep grass that only the very
tops of their heads could be seen.
These reports gave the brothers more courage for the journey, because
they realized that God was showing them the way. They were certain that
God had sent the two as guides and leaders. This proved the case, as will
soon be recounted.
Joseph Kuhr, Veit Glanzer, and Lorenz Tschetter were then asked to
go to the mountains near Kronstadt and find out where it was possible to
cross into Wallachia. *
The three brothers reached the mountains and looked for a way to
cross and for guides to take them. They were successful in their mission,
for four Wallachians agreed to a fixed payment to take the community
with its women and children out of Transylvania and over the mountains
into Wallachia, It would be extremely dangerous, for if they were caught
by the border patrol it would cost them their lives. Such guides were either
impaled or hanged.
While the three brothers were away, the others made preparations for
the journey. Various belongings were sold quietly, and sacks and bundles
of clothes and bed linen were prepared to carry on their backs.
The return of the three brothers was delayed, however, and
meanwhile, one message after another told that the Jesuit had everything
arranged. He had already written to the Szekler district for a regiment of
soldiers, and the people in the village were daily expecting its arrival. The
brothers and sisters were full of fear and anxiety as they thought of their
little children. They could not wait for the three brothers' return, but
ordered drivers and wagons from the next village, intending to flee
secretly by night and so escape Delphini, that murderer of souls. They
hoped they would meet the three brothers on the road.
Those imprisoned in the churchyard were not strictly guarded. They
could go in and out as long as some were always there. The guard kept the
key behind the churchyard gate in a hole in the old wall; the prisoners had
spied out its hiding place. Our plans were also no secret, but obvious to the

officials and the whole village. They were glad to see us preparing a secret
escape from Kreuz by night, for that would make it easier to excuse
themselves to the lords in Hermannstadt. The villagers were frightened of
the Roman Catholic priests as well.
All was ready for the flight. The hired drivers were to bring their
wagons into the community yard as soon as darkness fell the following
evening. A message was given to the prisoners that they would be sent
word when it was time to leave. But it seemed in no way God's will for us
to escape unseen in the dark. God in heaven had a quite different plan, and
that is why our arrangements failed. When the sun had set and the night
grown dark, everyone was waiting in great anticipation for the wagons to
arrive. But nothing went as expected and no one came, so the prisoners
received word that they could not set out that night. The next day the
wagoner in charge said he had lost both his horses, and that was why he
could not come.
Again an arrangement was made with the drivers for the following
night; if it were God's will, we would then begin our journey. The
prisoners were told to be ready to start out at nightfall. They waited and
waited, longing for word to come for them to leave. They took the key so
that nothing could happen to prevent them. But things went no better than
they had on the first night. Once more the drivers did not appear, and the
whole plan failed. Yet again the brothers made a firm arrangement with
the wagoners, who promised they would most certainly come on the third
evening. So for the third time everyone made ready to leave.
That very evening, the three brothers returned from their errand,
bringing good news with them. At first, Joseph Kuhr was not at all pleased
that there had been plans to start out before he and his companions were
back, but he was appeased when told what acute danger was staring the
community in the face. That evening, too, we waited for the drivers. That
evening, too, the wagons did not come. No one knew what to do next. It
almost seemed as if the Lord did not want us to move.
Because the journey was hindered in this way, the brothers gathered
that same night, and, in great fear of God, considered what must be done
next. They unanimously agreed to ask God's guidance by casting lots, and

this they did. They called earnestly upon the Lord, beseeching God to look
graciously on them in their need and show them whether it was his
fatherly will for them to move, or whether they should stay and await
whatever fate God permitted. Each believer was fully prepared in his heart
to obey God's will and be at peace whichever way the lot fell, whether God
showed us we must leave at once, or showed we must remain to await
bonds and imprisonment.
After this earnest prayer and pleading to God, the lots were cast in his
name, in complete surrender to his will. And the Lord showed us we
should leave. The whole church community found great joy and comfort in
this decision. New hope and courage rose in them and they resolved not to
flee secretly under cover of darkness as they had planned earlier, but to set
out in the full light of day. The prisoners were told of this resolve that
same night. All were in complete agreement and had full trust and
confidence that God would send his holy angels to go with them on the
journey to prepare their way and path.
***************

1767 Orders given to prevent the move from Stein
Meanwhile, the village officials at Stein had heard of the brothers'
preparations to leave. They immediately passed the information on to the
authorities, who forwarded instructions to arrest the people and so prevent
the move.
Before the messenger arrived with the order, however, half the people
had already left Stein by wagon. The rest were still in the house, intending
to follow when evening came. These were brother Martin Glanzer, his
sister Margarethe, his brother Christian's widow Maria and her son
Christian Glanzer; also Paul Glanzer, his wife Barbara, and Gretel Wipf
(the eldest daughter of Anna Wipf, who at this time was imprisoned in the
penitentiary at Hermannstadt).

The officials arrived at the community accompanied by several
peasants with weapons. They found the group still in the house, arrested
them, took them to the churchyard, and set a guard. The next day the
prisoners were moved to the market town of Reps and handed over to the
lords in authority there. The two brothers, Martin and Christian, were put
in a church the sisters were guarded in a room.
Brother Paul Glanzer escaped when the others were arrested.
Although great efforts were made to catch him, he got away into the
woods. For a long time he did not know which way he should choose,
whether he should follow the first group to Fratum, or give himself up and
be with the prisoners, for he found it very hard to leave his brothers and
his wife. In the end he decided he should go after the main group to tell
them the others had been captured; he reasoned that he could do nothing to
help the prisoners even if he joined them. God had helped him to escape;
therefore, he could not feel free to run into needless danger. He followed
the main group to Fratum and broke the sad news that the others had been
arrested and he had only just managed to get away.
The church community was deeply distressed at having to leave their
dear fellow members behind, but since there was nothing they could do to
alter the situation, they put the matter in God's hands. Every day in their
common prayer to God they interceded for the prisoners.
Now brothers were sent out to find a way across the river and
someone willing to take us over. They received the same answer as before:
We would be taken across if we had a permit; otherwise not. The
community was thrown into great anxiety, not knowing how we could
cross the river. We were afraid the Reps magistrates might pursue the
people from Stein, since they had already imprisoned some of their
number. But God the Lord, in his mercy, made a way through our
difficulties, and we were strongly aware of his help.
Brother Joseph Kuhr and others made every effort to find a place
where we could cross. They discovered a village upstream where a wagon
could ford the Olt when the water was low. Then we saw clearly how God
had prepared a path for his people. During the three days we had waited,

the water had fallen until it was very low, and we could risk driving
through.
***************

1767 The difficult journey to Kronstadt and over the
mountains
The brothers arranged to pay a wagoner from the village to take us
over. He came with his wagon harnessed to two yoke of oxen, and we
loaded the most necessary things on to it. Another man brought a punt to
ferry the people over.
On October 7 we set out just as darkness was falling and our two
wagons safely forded the Olt. The people were ferried across in the punt.
When the whole group was on the other side, we praised and thanked God
and went forward on our journey in his name. We reached the great
Kronstadt forest - a day's journey from one side to the other. This was a
strenuous night, for we kept walking the whole night through. We could
not stop to camp until we were out of the forest. Every time there was a
short pause for rest, the people were so weary that they collapsed on the
ground and slept. We had to take care not to lose any by leaving them
behind asleep. By the time we came out of the forest it was broad daylight.
We therefore camped in the woods beyond Nussbach and stayed there
for two days and a night.
The brothers now hired a wagon with six horses. We had to pay the
driver six gulden for it, and gave the money gladly for we were only too
happy to get someone. At sunset, we started out again. The wagons had to
keep to the road and pass through two villages, but it was too great a risk
for the people to go that way.
The wagoner sent his helper to guide the people, and he took them
across the fields to the hills and valleys to bypass the village and meet up
with the wagons further along the road. Finally we reached Kronstadt

Heath. The hired driver refused to pause for rest. He kept the horses going,
and our wagons and people were not allowed to lag behind, because he was
afraid he might be stopped. He hurried on to get around Kronstadt before
day. We had found it strenuous to cross Kronstadt Forest, but this night
was far more grueling. Many discovered what they would never have
believed possible: they could walk while they slept - or sleep while they
walked.
With great effort we succeeded in passing Kronstadt by daybreak and
turned to the right into a small valley running up toward the mountains.
We had to stop here, for we could go no farther. Young and old were
completely worn out by the exhausting journey. Somewhat refreshed by a
rest and a little food and drink, we made our way deeper into the woods for
we could be seen far too easily. Many people caught sight of us and
reported in Kronstadt that they had seen a crowd of men, women, and
children in the mountains. On hearing this, others came out to have a look
at us but did not find us because we had moved to a better place in the
woods.
Brother Joseph and another brother went to the village where we had
hired guides. They were not at home, because we had arrived somewhat
earlier than the time arranged. The community was again filled with
anxiety, in dread of being forced to go back.
A huntsman came on us in the middle of the dense woods. He asked
us who we were. We told him that we had left the Hermannstadt district
because our faith was not tolerated there. He said, You're in a sorry plight
and no mistake! You're like a bird flying into the net. We gave him a drink
of brandy and asked him to keep quiet about us and not betray our
whereabouts. For a long time he kept refusing and would neither accept
the brandy nor promise to remain silent. He said he was bound by oath to
tell his lord whenever he met such people in the woods. When we kept on
offering him a drink, he finally took one, then went off through the wood,
shouting and calling as if other huntsmen were near, but no one answered.
The encounter redoubled our fear and anxiety, for we thought we
would all be caught. The elders, however, in particular Andreas Wurz,
encouraged the flock, telling us we should not have so little faith and so

quickly lose trust in God's help. If it were God's will for us to be
imprisoned, we should patiently accept it at his hands. What help was all
this talk and moaning and groaning?
That very same day the guides returned, and we made ready to leave
in the evening. It was impossible to take the wagons over the mountains,
so we loaded what was absolutely necessary onto the four horses. We
unharnessed the four oxen and drove them with us, leaving the empty
wagons for the guides to bring through customs as opportunity offered.
When everything was ready and the sun began to sink, we started on
our way again. It was October 13. The guides led us through pathless
thickets and wilderness, for they knew where we would be safe from
danger; they were familiar with every path and hiding place in the
mountains. The ground began to rise sharply, and often the only way was
to clamber up on hands and feet. Each of us had to scramble up as best he
could, so as not to be left behind. In some places it was hard work to bring
the laden horses up the steep slopes. The climb went on all night. Every
reader can imagine how difficult and exhausting it was, with little children
on our backs, with young, old, and weak, all struggling up the high
mountainside in the dark of night. All did their utmost, using their last
drop of energy without sparing themselves. All hurried on, eager to flee
from Babel and the abomination that causes desolation.
At dawn, we came to a high wall of rock in the middle of the forest.
We had to stay quiet here the whole day.
By now the bread and other food we had brought with us were used up
and we had nothing left. The guides had to go back to fetch bread and
flour. They returned with it by nightfall. After we had eaten, we again set
off, climbing on up the mountain until at last we came out of the woods to
the bare, smooth rock above the timberline. When we reached the crest, we
halted a little while. Then our guides told us that we had already succeeded
in crossing over the border into Wallachia and were out of danger. We
could now release the dogs, which we had had to keep on the leash until
then.

From the lofty mountain we could look back on a wonderful moonlit
view of Burzenland with its villages scattered across the plains. *
We continued our journey until daybreak, going down little by little
on the further side of the mountain until we came to a stream and made
camp. Then we held our common prayer in thanksgiving. We praised God
for delivering his people from the hand and power of the false prophets
and murderers of souls, and for graciously helping every one of us to cross
the terrible mountains so that not one was lost or came to any kind of
harm.
The Jesuit Delphini had planned to take our children from us and put
them in the orphanage. He had induced the Roman Catholic empress,
Maria Theresa, to consent. Everything had been prepared in the suburb of
Hermannstadt called Trenchment. Beds stood ready for the children.
But God brought Delphini's plans to nothing, for the net he had spread
to trap us was torn, and when he came to take us, we were already out of
the country. Praise to God who did not leave us a prey to our enemies'
teeth! We escaped with our lives, like a bird from the fowler's trap; the
trap broke and so we escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, maker
of heaven and earth. (Psalm 124:6-8)
We rested and recovered a little, had some food and drink, and then
were on our way again. The guides told us to follow the course of the
stream, not leaving it until we came out of the mountains onto lower land.
We paid them what we had promised, and they went back to fetch our
wagons and baggage.
All that day and some of the night, we followed the stream. Soon we
had to keep crossing from one side to the other. The further we went, the
larger and more powerful the stream grew, and as the current was swift, we
could scarcely wade over without being swept off our feet.
Our first night in Wallachia we camped in the woods and made a few
fires to dry our wet clothes. There was no lack of wood and water - only of
food. That evening each of us received a small piece of meat and a little
balukas, but we had nothing else. The next day we set out with empty

stomachs and went on until, at about ten o'clock, we finally reached an inn.
There we were able to buy a little millet meal and milk, so we could have
some food. Everyone was given some wine as well. **
We continued following the stream, which was now too deep for us to
wade, and after a few days reached Campina, our first market town in
Wallachia, where goods were stored for transport to Transylvania. We had
to wait until our wagons and other belongings had caught up with us.
Although we had little food, because in some places there was no bread or
flour to buy, we bore it without complaint. We were full of joy that through
God's help we had escaped from the false prophets! We could now serve
God in freedom, without anyone preventing us, and could remain together
in peace and unity. ***
At the same time our hearts ached for the beloved brothers and sisters
we had been forced to leave behind in prison in Transylvania. We longed
to know what was happening to them. Paul Glanzer and his brother Veit
Glanzer were asked to go back to Transylvania to visit them in Reps and
Hermannstadt.
Setting out in God's name, the two brothers came first to Reps, then
to Hermannstadt, and told the prisoners how God had helped us escape to
safety. They passed on greetings from all the believers, and their eyes were
wet with tears as they took leave and made their way to Alwinz. Then they
went back to Kronstadt. On their return to the church community in
Wallachia they were accompanied by Elias Wipf - the brother who, as we
described earlier, had been imprisoned for a time in Klausenburg with
Jakob Stutz and had afterwards recanted. Now he was put into exclusion
for his unfaithfulness; he repented and was reaccepted.
After the brothers and sisters from Stein had been imprisoned for two
months in the fortress at Reps, they were transferred to Hermannstadt and
imprisoned in the town hall with the rest of our people.
***************

1767 Searching for a suitable place to build
On October 26, 1767, we left Campina and went further into
Wallachia. We came to Ploesti, where we had to go to the police
commissioner to have our names recorded. This nobleman then wanted us
to settle on his property. We agreed to do this if the place was suitable, and
he sent a man on horseback to accompany us to his estate at Tschakerlain.
On arrival we were confronted with a forbidding wilderness. The soil was
certainly very rich, and there was running water with a mill beside it; but
there was no wood, not even enough to keep a fire in the stove, far less to
build houses. Since the lack of wood made the place unsuited for us, we
decided to travel further. *
We sent Hans Kleinsasser, the Elder of the church, and brother Joseph
Kuhr to Bucharest, the capital city of Wallachia, to look for somewhere the
community might settle. The two brothers reached Bucharest, and while
they were walking about the city, a German asked them who they were and
what they were doing. They explained that they and their wives and
children had fled from Transylvania because they were not allowed to
practice their faith there. Now they were looking for a place where they
could settle with their wives and children, widows and orphans.
The German, a native of Saxony named Jakob Friedrich Wölfl,
responded, Come out to the country with me, and if you like it there you
can settle next to me. There is plenty of room.
The brothers were glad to meet a German. They went out to his
property with him and had a look at the area, and since they liked what
they saw, they decided to move the whole community there.
They returned to Tschakerlain and told the community they had found
a good place where wood, water, and everything else they needed was
available.
So we moved on again from Tschakerlain to the place we had chosen,
and arrived on November 16. The estate belonged to a magnate or
nobleman named Kätzike. The place was called Tschoregirle after the
brook there. It means ravens brook. **

***************

1767 Dugouts built for houses
Winter was approaching and we had no houses or shelter, so of
necessity we followed the custom of other poor people in this country, and
built ourselves burdeen, or dugouts. They were made like this: A hole was
dug in the ground as long and wide as one wished the house to be. Next a
post was set up in the middle of each end, and a beam or ridge pole was
raised and put across the top. If the dugout under construction was longer
than the beam, another pole was erected in the middle to support the join
in the ridge poles. Then from both sides the hut was covered over with
pieces of wood, one end resting on the earth, the other on the ridge pole
that was supported by the posts. Then the wood was covered with a little
straw, and dirt was spread on top. One or two windows were put in one
gable end, a door in the other, and all was made as watertight as possible.
The stove was put wherever one wished. We hurriedly built five or six
such burdeen in order to have somewhere to live through the winter.
Although it seemed strange to us to live underground like this, we were
well content to have reached a place where we could be in peace and have
complete freedom of religion.
***************

1768 Work was established/Spinning, Weaving and Pottery
Jakob Wölfl, who was in service with the prince, was not at home
when we arrived, but was away collecting sheep tax from the farmers. He
came home three days before New Year. A week later, he became very sick
and after another two weeks he died. We brothers bought the house where
he had lived, the garden which he had newly begun, a piece of land seeded
with winter crops, ten head of cattle, twenty-four beehives, and some

household equipment. We made the purchase on January 27, 1768, and it
cost us 200 gulden in German currency.
We managed to get through the winter and began little by little to set
up our spinning and weaving. When spring came we started seeding the
fields for summer crops. With strenuous effort we cleared the thorny brush
from a large piece of land for an orchard, planted a vineyard, and set to
work building houses.
This spring, brother Joseph Kuhr and Paul Glanzer were again sent on
a journey to Transylvania to visit the prisoners in Hermannstadt. Brother
Joseph also had a great longing to bring his children back with him to
Wallachia, for they had remained in Transylvania. But although Michel
Kuhr promised that he and his brother Andreas and sister Gretel would
follow their father later, he did not keep his word, for his heart was set on
his riches and worldly goods and he could not bring himself to leave them.
So Joseph Kuhr and Paul Glanzer did not succeed in more than visiting the
prisoners, and they returned alone.
Brother Johannes Stahl was by trade a potter or maker of porcelain,
and so we thought we should set up a pottery first of all. We bought bricks
from a nobleman and began building a kiln on an open space. We covered
it with some mortar to protect it a little from the weather, and intended to
build a proper workshop afterward. The wheel was set up in a burdee. In a
short while Johannes succeeded in producing beautiful whiteglazed dishes.
The nobility, even the prince himself with his princess, came out from
Bucharest to visit us and see the pottery. Sometimes seven or eight
carriages were in our farmyard.
It looked as if in a short time we would do very well, but the sun soon
went behind dark clouds. This was not the place for God's church to gather
and be established. He had planned another, as we shall see.
***************

1768 Severe sickness/Start of Russian-Turkish war

When spring was over and the hot months of June, July, and August
followed, God allowed a very different time to come. Severe sickness
broke out among us, as often happens to those who move to a foreign
country and are not yet acclimatized. On many days, sixteen to eighteen
people lay sick in bed, mostly with very high fever. At this time some fell
asleep in the Lord, among them dear brother Georg Waldner, who died
with a peaceful heart on August 16, 1768, at the age of 56. He had been
schoolmaster for the community. For six years he had taught the children
reading, writing, singing, and other useful subjects to the praise, honor,
and glory of God. He had introduced the weaving trade in our community
and had taught it to some of the young brothers.
In the same year, 1768, a war provoked by the Poles broke out
between the Turks and the Muscovites, or Russians. The Lord's church
suffered great harm in this war, as will be described later.
Because we had to contend with severe sicknesses that persisted all
through the summer and autumn and right into the winter, we were unable
to continue building. It was all we could do to bring in the winter-sown
crops we had bought and our summer crops as well. The water was very
bad, so we had no wish to stay, but planned to move to a fresh place where
the drinking water would be fresh, too. We moved in the following spring,
after spending two winters in the dugouts and managing as best we could.
***************

1768 Incident over a wooden cross
An incident with most unhappy results for the church took place this
winter, and a short account is given here. The majority of people in the
country were Wallachians who belonged to the Greek Catholic religion and
observed its idolatrous customs. Everywhere in the country along all the
roads, at crossroads, and wherever a road branched off, numbers of stone
and wooden crosses were set up. The passersby bowed to them with great
reverence and made the sign of the cross by touching forehead and breast.

We considered these observances blind idolatry, and the young people more out of childish mischief and recklessness than godly zeal - took upon
themselves to damage and disfigure some of the crosses. They pushed
them over or hacked at them with a hoe. When an older brother spoke to
one of the boys about it, he resisted the admonition by demanding, Do you
want to encourage idolatry then?- and so on.
One day a Wallachian happened to see what was going on. He at once
reported it to the household priest of the nobleman on whose land we were
living, and the priest immediately informed the nobleman. It was
accounted a very grave offense.
The nobleman sent for Joseph Kuhr, told him this was a serious
crime, and explained the law of the land on the point. The country was
subject to the sultan, but he had granted the right and privilege that no
Turk might mock religious ceremonies and crosses or treat them
irreverently. If any Turk out of anger or spite were to deface one of the
crosses with saber, knife, or hoe, and were caught in the act, the law
demanded that either his hand must be cut off or else he must pay five
hundred bags of money - and one bag alone equaled five hundred gulden.
We must understand the gravity of what we had done.
Brother Joseph told them he was very sorry, but he had not been
aware of what was happening. It had occurred without his knowledge. The
nobleman said he could bring forward eyewitnesses. He kept insisting that
the culprits should be handed over so that the law could be enforced and
their hands cut off. We humbly pleaded for pardon and asked the nobleman
and his priest to take into account that we were newly arrived in the
country and did not know the severity of its laws, and that the offense had
been committed by youths without understanding. But the two were far
from ready to respond to this pleading. More than once they threatened to
report the matter to the prince, so the community was extremely anxious
about the outcome of the affair. The brother responsible for the damage
contrived to disappear for a time, until the trouble had blown over.
There is no doubt that God in heaven softened the nobleman's heart,
for he finally gave in to all the persuasion. God be praised, he dropped the
case that had seemed so serious a threat to us

I have reported this as a warning to young people and those who live
after us, so that they do not get into trouble out of rashness and
impudence, causing difficulty, distress, and expense to the whole church.
This is no true witness to the ungodly. Rather let us be steadfast witnesses
for the truth when the occasion demands it.
***************

1769 A new place to settle
Springtime came and the brothers looked around for another place to
settle. They found a beautiful area that the Wallachians spoke of as the
lowest part of Paradise. It was called Presetschain, from the name of the
nobleman who owned it. Years earlier, there had been a nobleman's manor
house there, but it had fallen into ruin and only the fruit trees - apple,
cherry, and plum - and the nut trees remained. Wood for building was so
close at hand that we could haul four good, full loads a day;' about eighty
logs altogether. There were fields to cultivate and pasture for the cattle
right at our door, much better soil than a Tschoregirle, and good, fresh
water.
As the new place was not far from the old, about seven, or eight
miles, we planned to take down the house we had bought and haul it over.
But Katzike, the owner of the estate where we were living, was very angry
with us for wishing to leave his land. He wanted to keep us by force, and
forbade us to remove anything from his property. He could not, however,
prevent us from moving, because the prince had given us permission to
settle where we liked.
On April 3, 1769, nearly every able-bodied brother left Tschoregirle,
crossed the River Ardschisch and went to Presetschain to start building on
open ground. Because of his work, brother Johannes Stahl remained at
Tschoregirle with brother Hans Kleinsasser and the women and children
until the housing was ready. *

That spring, five soldiers came to us, deserters from the imperial
army who had crossed the border into Wallachia. They said they wanted to
be our brothers, and one of them requested and received baptism. That
whole summer they helped in the work, but when autumn came and the
brotherhood was all at Presetschain, troubled times began. Then one after
another of the soldiers went away until not one was left. Some went
secretly, stealing this or that from the community as they made off.
Work on our buildings progressed: during spring and summer of that
year we built three houses and a good barn for the cattle. We again built a
kiln for our pottery. By the end of October most of the work was done and
the crops had been harvested from the fields. The houses were not walled
with masonry or made of boards. Split hazel sticks were woven between
three sticks like a fence and plastered inside and out with clay. The rooms
proved warm and serviceable, for winters are not so long and severe there
as in Russia. Sheep and cattle had been driven out to pasture throughout
the previous winter. By the end of February, grass and leaves were already
appearing.
We had to pay the prince a yearly tax of forty talers. In addition, there
were taxes on sheep and bees. For every sheep we had to give five paras
(two pass make a groschen, or three kreuzer) and the same for every hive
of bees. We did not need to pay taxes on cattle, but five paras for each hog
and horse. We had also agreed to pay fifteen gulden and a tenth on field
crops to the magnate, Katzike. The nobleman at Presetschain was young
and poor. We agreed with him to pay a yearly rent of five gulden and a
tenth of the field crops.
On November 13, 1769, at Presetschain, our dear brother, Andreas
Wurz fell asleep in the Lord with a peaceful heart. He was fifty-eight years
old and for four years, through sad and troubled times, had worked
faithfully and honestly in the service of steward, or householder. Brother
Paul Glanzer was elected steward in his place.
***************

1769 Russians conquer the Turks/robbed people
By now, we were quite well established and had every hope of
enjoying a quiet and peaceful life in the houses we had built with sweat
and toil during the summer. But soon after dear brother Andreas Wurz's
death, a time of extreme need and distress set in, for the Russo-Turkish
War, which had broken out in Poland in 1768, continued into 1769.
The Muscovites or Russians got the upper hand. They were victorious
in one battle after another and took one city after another, so that in a short
time they had conquered all Moldavia and Wallachia. Count Rumiantsev,
field marshal to the czar, even led his army across the Danube and took a
number of towns in Turkey. In honor of this he received the title
Zadunaysky, which means victorious to beyond the Danube
A factor greatly in his favor was that the people's sympathies lay
more with the Russians than with the Turks, for the Wallachians - even the
nobles and the prince himself - belonged to the Greek Orthodox religion
and so shared the same faith as the Russians. They therefore willingly
surrendered to them, gave them an enthusiastic reception in all the towns,
and lent strong support in driving the Turks from the country.
The Turks were forced to make a rapid retreat. During their flight two
pashas and their men arrived at Presetschain on November 16 and
quartered themselves among us overnight. They cost the already poor
community a great deal. We had to supply more than fifteen bushels of
barley for the horses and as much hay as they needed. In addition, we had
to provide honey, butter, eggs, and whatever else they demanded. They
threatened to beat us if we protested that we did not have things and could
not get them. Although the nearby villages of Tschakan and Gredinai
promised to send supplies, nothing reached us. The Turks did not do
anything else to us, but we did not trust these brutal men. The sisters
slipped away and spent the night in the woods, away to one side. The
following day, the Turkish soldiers continued their flight.
About this time, the Russian soldiers had already forced their way
into the capital, Bucharest. The mob, with all kinds of shiftless and

dishonest people, flocked to their standard and enlisted. Afterwards the
rabble roamed the countryside under the pretext of defending their country
and driving out the Turks. But in fact they did the reverse, for they stole
right and left, plundering many of the nobility and treating both men and
women cruelly to extort money.
Late on November 23, several of these robbers arrived to question us
and to spy out how things looked with us and what sort of people we were.
It was plain that they were plotting something against us, but they went
away without doing any harm.
Then a gang of these thieves banded together. Two of them were
Germans from Bucharest, men we knew quite well, and they were almost
the worst of all. They planned to raid us the following day. A good friend
from the village told us of the scheme, but no one quite believed or
expected it would bring such terrible pain and grief as we actually had to
endure.
***************

1769 Robbers treat community with inhuman cruelty-took
everything
Just as the sun rose on the following day, November 24, this band of
godless robbers rode their horses into our farm. Their leader first asked for
the steward, brother Andreas Wurz. When told that he had died the week
before, they started on brother Joseph. If he were a good Christian, they
said, he should make the sign of the cross, touching forehead and breast in
a Christian manner. The Roman Catholics, and the Greek churches, too,
have become so blind and error-ridden that simply making the sign of the
cross - a man-made custom they invented themselves - is accepted as the
sign of a good Christian. The Roman Catholic catechism contains the
question: How can a Catholic Christian be recognized? The answer is: By
the sign of the cross! - as if Christ had never told us how to recognize his
true disciples. But the robbers' real interest was not in the sign of a true

Christian. They began in this way only as an excuse to attack us. When
brother Joseph refused to cross himself, they started swearing at us,
saying, You are not Jews, Turks, or Christians. You are the very worst of
filthy, blasphemous heathen.
They began driving our people into a room. One of the Germans from
Bucharest was holding a spear. He stood at the door with his weapon and
allowed no one out. Then we could see plainly enough what they had in
mind, and several brothers escaped through the attic. But a few consulted
each other and, decided they would remain together and await whatever
God would permit to happen to them. These stayed in the house.
The robbers at once began ransacking the house, climbing up into the
attics, going through all the bedrooms and living rooms and taking
bedding, clothes, and other household goods, and whatever else they liked.
Chests and boxes were broken open and everything was searched, for what
they most wanted was money.
When they did not find it, they were consumed with rage. They began
beating the brothers to frighten them into handing it over. In fact we had
very little, for we had left our house and goods unsold in Transylvania, and
the journey over the mountains and two years of house-building had taken
almost all we had. Although we explained this and tried to make them
understand, they took no notice, but continued to harass us, insisting we
give them money and be quick about it!
Since we did not and could not give them the community's money as
they demanded, their rage knew no bounds. They thrust plowshares and a
shovel into the fire and heated them until they glowed red. Meanwhile
they tied up brother Johannes Stahl and brother Veit Glanzer, threatening
to burn them with the hot iron unless they told where the money was or
who had charge of it.
They burned Johannes Stahl's forehead a little with the fire-shovel,
but he got away from them, and when another brother released him from
his bonds, he crept under a bed in the bedroom and they did not catch him
again.

Brother Veit Glanzer was still in their hands. They asked him for just
two gulden. As he had no money on him and could give them nothing, they
wanted to burn him with the red-hot plowshare and had already pulled his
shirt out of his trousers. He was so terrified that he took them to Hans
Kleinsasser, the Elder, who was lying sick on his bed in the cellar. Veit
begged the Elder to have pity and give two gulden to save him from being
burned. In the distress of the moment, brother Hans Kleinsasser did not
know what else to do. In front of the robbers he yielded to Veit's pleading
and fetched out two gulden. Once they had these, they were in no way
satisfied but went on searching until the pitifully small sum belonging to
the community was fully in their hands and not a cent was left. They
released brother Veit, who disappeared and stayed hidden until evening.
Now that they had the community's very scanty supply of money the
two scoundrels said not a word to anyone; even their leader knew nothing.
The others continued with their brutality. They took one older brother after
another out of the room into the yard, flung him to the ground, and lashed
him with whips and leather straps until they were tired. Joseph Kuhr was
most often thrown down and beaten because he could speak the Wallachian
language and had done most of the talking, but brothers Joseph
Kleinsasser, Peter Müller, Lorenz Tschetter, and Christian Hofer were
mercilessly beaten, too. When the robbers tired from beating a brother,
they let him get up, and after a short while they took another. They also
went around the room striking first this person, then that, with iron
hammers, clubs, and whips, while continually demanding money. As many
of the brothers, sisters, and children did not know the Wallachian
language, these godless robbers picked up a plate and went around with it,
holding it out to people to try to explain what they wanted.
Others came into the cellar where brother Hans Kleinsasser was lying
sick, and pulled him from bed wearing only a shirt. He quickly snatched an
old black coat to wrap around him before they dragged him into the yard.
As he lay on the ground they beat hard on his bare feet with whips and
leather straps until he was covered with welts. When they had finished
beating him, they put him back in the house with the others. In the
entrance room was a bed with nothing but a little straw on it, for the
bedclothes had been stolen. The brother lay down on it, longing to be

given a chance to rest. He soon realized that the leader and the other
robbers did not know that some of their number had already taken the
community's money, so he sent to ask the leader what more they wanted
when the last cent of the brotherhood's money was already in their hands?
The leader wished to know which men had taken it. When the brother told
him, the robbers gathered around these two men, who then had to give up
the money to be divided among them all. But it seemed far too small a
sum and they did not believe that the community could have had so little.
The robbers began using even more brutal methods. From what had
happened previously, they assumed that brother Hans Kleinsasser might
have more money, and they mistreated him still worse. Seizing him by the
beard, they pulled him from the bed so roughly that almost half his beard
was torn out. This terribly disfigured his appearance, for he was a goodlooking, dignified man. They kicked him violently and dragged him into
the yard. Under the roof there happened to be two flails of the kind used
for threshing Turkish wheat. They were pieces of wood more than two
spans long, about as thick as a haypole, with a heavy handle attached. The
robbers took these flails and, one on each side, struck him on his back or
side or wherever the blows might fall. The brother was knocked back and
forth and beaten almost unconscious. It was dreadful to watch. No one
would have believed that any man could survive such treatment. It looked
as if his ribs and all his bones would be broken.
When at last they stopped beating him and he had struggled to raise
himself, they ordered him to kneel. One of the robbers drew a sword,
threatening to cut off his head if Hans did not show them where the money
was. They were still hoping to frighten him into giving more. The brother
was sorry they had obtained the community's money in the heat of an
unguarded moment, and he would not have given more even if there had
been any to give. As they could get nothing from him, he was pushed back
in the room with the others.
Brother Mathies Kleinsasser was the next victim. He was the
community's schoolteacher. The robbers dragged him from the school into
the yard and beat him with such brutality that we thought he would be
beaten to a pulp. He himself expected to be crippled for the rest of his life.

When they could not extort money from him, they cursed and swore and
flung the flails away.
Meanwhile, others of the gang had put a plowshare back in the fire
until it was red hot. They seized brother Joseph, took him into the yard,
threw him to the ground, stripped him, and burned his naked body with the
glowing iron. He endured everything with steadfast patience. And as they
could get nothing from him, they brought him back to the group in the
house.
Then one of the robbers stepped to the door, drew his saber, pushed
up his shirt sleeves, and said to the brothers in the room, Come out of
there one at a time so I can cut your heads off. But when no one came, he
did not carry out his threat.
God allowed his people, his own children, to suffer such sorrow so
that they might taste a little from his cup, yet he did not permit any to be
killed by these godless men who were bent on murdering some of them.
They tried every means to frighten the brothers into giving them
money. They locked all the doors and threatened to burn us together with
the houses. The leader ordered them to bring torches to start the fire. The
believers were in terror, and in this need I prayed to God, O Lord, are you
going to let your church end like this, and let your truth and light be
blotted out, to disappear completely? Oh, it can't be like this! And God did
not allow it to happen.
The doors were opened and the robbers again began going in and out;
they searched in every corner and started to dig under the steps. They
never stopped beating and torturing the innocent, God-fearing people who
had done nothing to injure them. One of them stood over Peter Müller and
lashed him with a leather strap. He lashed until the sweat ran down his
face and he was tired out. Brother Peter died afterwards. He fell asleep in
the Lord on December 8. They pinched brother Johannes Hofer's nose with
the tongs until the blood ran. Brother Hans Kleinsasser was sitting on a
bench near the window. A robber leveled a gun at him as if he meant to
shoot him. He actually fired, but God protected the Elder, for the bullet
just missed his head and went out of the window.

A big pot had been put over the fire on the hearth and some beans
were cooking in it. The robbers took hold of it, tipped the food out onto the
floor in the entry room, and stole the pot. The German from Bucharest
exclaimed, Oh my God! Who did that? What a terrible sin! He acted as if
he was reluctant to sin, but then sinned far worse, as will now be told.
One of the robbers had fetched Maria Nägeler, a young sister about
fifteen years old, and brought her out of the school into the yard. The
godless man tormented her, telling her to make the sign of the cross. She
refused point blank to do it.
The German went up to her and said, My child, he wants you to cross
yourself. If you refuse, he will cut off your head.
She said, I will not do it. I would rather die.
Her tormentor drew his sword as if to behead her, but when Maria
would not let herself be intimidated and was ready to die rather than
submit, something in him was touched, and he left her alone. After a while
he looked for her again and wanted to take her with him. She had hidden
herself, however, and did not fall into his hands.
Up to this point the two Germans had not beaten or laid hands on
anyone, but they cursed and swore violently when they saw that the others
could not extort more money from us. The sum was too small, far too
small, they said, and the other robbers should be still more ruthless with
us. They therefore went to work themselves. Taking a rope, one of them
entered the room where brother Joseph Kuhr was sitting on a chair. He
bound Joseph's feet so that he could still walk, although hobbled, and led
him outside the door. After ordering Joseph to sit on the ground, the
German demanded money and threatened that if he refused to hand it over,
they would torture him until he did. The brother told them he could give
nothing, for all the community's money was already taken. Then they
hanged him by the feet, just high enough for the very tips of his fingers to
touch the ground a little, and they left him hanging. It wrung one's heart to
see such inhumanity. They even put a fire under him that singed his hair
and beard. The brother bore it all with fortitude. He thought he would
certainly lose his life in the fire and smoke, and he cried in his heart to

God: Lord, I commit my spirit into thy hand. After he had hung like this
for a quarter of an hour or longer and his torturers saw that they could not
terrify him into giving them money, they untied the rope and let him fall to
the ground.
***************

1769 Johannes Waldner's own experience of the inhuman
treatment
Christian God-fearing reader! I am writing all this from my own
experience. It was not reported to me by someone else; I was actually
present. I saw it with my own eyes and to some extent shared in the
suffering.
Although I was a boy of sixteen at the time and had received baptism
by water only a year before, God counted me worthy to share I the
believer's suffering, and although this persecution was not for the sake of
faith, it was also not for any offense we had committed. We suffered in
innocence, & what a believer suffers while innocent is Christ's suffering.
One of the robbers brought me out of the room into the yard. They
flung me to the ground, held me by my head and feet, and one of them
gave me at least fifteen to twenty blows with a stick. Then they let me get
up again. The German said to me, My child, show us where your money is,
or who has charge of it, and you won't be beaten anymore. But praise God
for his fatherly protection that kept me from sinning against brotherly
love! I said only, I haven't any money. I don't know about any money. Not a
single cent. They pulled me down again and beat me as hard as before.
When they got the same answer as before, they let me go and thrust me
back into the house with the others.
The same kind of brutality went on from early morning until almost
evening. I cannot describe the cruel treatment of innocent people. The
robbers seized and carried off whatever they liked: clothes, bedding,

crockery, and all kinds of household goods; they even stripped the clothes
off some of our people. And it was not only the soldiers-turned-robbers
who stole; neighbors from the surrounding district carried away many of
our goods, too. We were left with nothing but the cattle at pasture, the
Turkish wheat we had grown that summer, the houses, and a little barley
and cabbage in the cellar.
As evening came, the robbers began to leave. They tied the loot onto
their horses and led them off. The believers looked on and had to let it
happen. They entrusted their cause to the righteous Judge who requites
each one according to his deeds.
***************

1769 Another gang of thieves/continual molest
The first gang of thieves had scarcely gone before another came
galloping up. They, too, intended to raid and get a good sum of money out
of us. When they saw that everything had been smashed and ruined, that
the house was already looted and the people terribly injured by the
inhuman beatings, they realized that others had been there before them and
they had missed their chance. They said they were very sorry for us, but at
the same time gathered up and took with them any clothing, tools, and
household stores that were still lying here or there in the yard. When we
reckoned up the loss suffered by the community through this robbery, it
reached 394 gulden.
The following day, the leader of these robbers came riding into our
yard again, bringing a few others with him. They went into the house and
acted in a very friendly way, as if they were sorry we had been so badly
treated. Then they spoke to brother Joseph Kuhr, Paul Glanzer, who was
steward at the time, and a few other brothers who were still at the house
(while brother Hans Kleinsasser and most of our people had fled to the
woods). The robbers told Joseph that if we would give them one gulden
per head, they would let us have a letter of safe conduct so that no one

would injure us again. He was trying to find out whether the community
had any money left. One can only suppose that if we had agreed to give
something, they would have set to work on us again. Brother Joseph
replied, My dear sir, it would be a good thing to let us have a letter of safe
conduct, but we cannot give you even one para, far less a gulden per head,
for we haven't a cent. That was all the robber leader wanted to know. He
said nothing more about a letter of safe conduct, but rode off with his
companions.
Soon afterward, we heard that these robbers, or Arnauts as they were
called, had nearly all been killed in a battle against the Turks. *
There was no peace for the community from this time on. Throughout
the winter, we were continually molested by soldiers moving from one
place to another. On several occasions, large numbers quartered
themselves among us overnight. They seized wood, hay, poultry, and
anything else they needed. Once they made thirty fires in our yard on the
same night. All this was a severe loss to the already poor community. **
To escape the raiders, we had to leave our houses in the first weeks of
the new year. The whole community - with the women and children, and
with our cattle, too - had to take to the woods in the cold of winter. Seven
or eight brothers stayed behind in the houses to protect them from arson.
***************

1770 Request for safe-conduct/plans to leave Wallachia
A short while later, at the beginning of 1770, we heard that General
Sametin had reached Bucharest with considerable forces. A number of
other well-known people were in the city as well, so we sent two brothers
to tell them of the robbery and the need it had caused us, and to request a
letter of safe-conduct. As the first visit was not very fruitful, the brothers
had to go a number of times, and in the course of these visits they got to
know General Sametin. He made inquiries about the kind of people we

were, and was so full of sympathy and compassion for us that he gave us a
letter of safe-conduct forbidding anyone to molest us.
This eased conditions a little, for the roaming Cossacks and Arnauts
had to leave us and our camp in the woods alone.
There was, however, no hope of the war ending quickly or of our
being able to settle in a country where people were such thieves - not only
in wartime but in peacetime, too - and where there was much ill-treatment
and little justice. We therefore decided to leave Wallachia whenever God
showed us a way out and somewhere to settle.
We let the commander-in-chief, General Sametin, know that we found
it impossible to stay longer where we were, and that we would be eager to
leave the country if only we knew of a place to go. We also told him of our
great poverty, for we had lost everything in the war and had nothing left to
pay our way on the journey.
God moved General Sametin's heart, making him full of
understanding and pity for us. He cared for us with kindness and
consideration, even though we were aliens and strangers to him. As the
war extended over the whole of Wallachia, Moldavia, and Poland, and as it
was impossible to find a peaceful place anywhere near, he believed it
would be best for us to move all the way to Russia.
The church community of God did not want to act without God's
counsel and consent. We turned to the Lord in earnest entreaty and
continued praying in oneness of heart that he might show us his good and
gracious will: whether it was his pleasure for us to leave the country or
whether we should remain. When we drew lots for the decision, the Lord
showed us we should move away.
Two brothers were again sent to General Sametin. They took a small
present and informed him that the community wished to emigrate to
Russia - on the one condition that we would be allowed freedom of
religion. We had written out for him the most important points of faith
which had led to our persecution in the Holy Roman Empire.

The messengers returned with the good news that in the Russian
Empire there was no persecution on grounds of faith; every type of creed
and religion was tolerated, and we would be given help for the journey. We
were directed to Kiev, a city on the border between Poland and the
Ukraine. Once there, we were to notify the central government council
responsible for the province. The general gave us a wagon and a pair of
oxen for the journey and supplied an official pass. He told us that on our
way we would meet the main part of the troops with Count Rumiantsev,
the field-marshal-in-chief. We should speak with him and he would help
us travel farther. We gave praise and thanks to God for all this, for he
never ceases to show us mercy and to provide us with a way out of our
troubles. After all the gloomy, clouded days, we now had great hopes of
seeing the sun again.
Preparations for the journey were begun. We sold one or two things
which had been left behind by the robbers and which we did not want to
take with us. In this way, we got a few gulden together and were quite
astonished by it, because only a little earlier the church community had
been so destitute that we did not have a cent. As winter was barely over,
we postponed our departure until there was grass for pasturing the
animals.
Meanwhile, the Russian forces had driven the Turks right out of
Wallachia to Giurgiu. This town is on the River Danube, which here serves
as boundary between Wallachia and Turkey. Although the Turks often
resisted the Russians and fought several battles with them, they had no
success and were repeatedly forced to give ground and flee. The Russian
soldiers were entrenched near Wekerest. The Turks hoped to make a
surprise attack. Learning of the plan in time, the Russians advanced on the
Turks with heavy artillery, concentrating fire on them from the large
cannon until they were compelled to withdraw. The 1770 site of the battle
was three hours' journey from us, yet we could feel the earth shaking under
our feet, and the windows in the houses rattled.
***************

1770 The war continued
On one occasion, the Turks actually won a battle and wiped out the
Russian rifle brigade, not leaving one survivor. But this was due to
treachery, for the commander was a Wallachian lord who had once been
next in power to the prince. The Turks bribed him to draw up his forces on
terrain where the Russians were at a great disadvantage. The Russian
soldiers realized this and cried, Ne dobre, ne dobre! which means, No
good, no good!
As they showed great valor in spite of the odds, the commandant cut
off their supply of powder and lead. Then the Russians had nothing but
bayonets to defend themselves and were gradually surrounded by great
numbers of Turks and killed to the last man. This defeat was thoroughly
avenged, however, when the Russians attacked the Turks at Giurgiu, put
them to flight, captured the city, and slaughtered many thousands of
people. The remnant had to flee across the Danube into Turkey, leaving
their goods, cattle, and sheep behind them.
The Wallachians living on the Turkish frontier by the Danube then
left their homes and went further inland, taking with them thousands of
sheep, black buffaloes, cattle, and other farm animals that had belonged to
the Turks. Some came into our area and encamped in the nearby woods
and in the villages beyond the woods.
***************

1770 Turks attack the community/escape from slavery
Shortly afterward, about two thousand Turks set out to Turks
attacked raid Wallachia and reclaim the people, cattle, and goods that
Presetschain, had been stolen. On March 27, they crossed the Danube, and
leaving the town of Giurgiu at evening, they rode on through the night.
About six or seven o'clock the following morning, they made a surprise
attack on us at Presetschain. They came galloping from all sides and

surrounded the place before we knew what was happening. Ten of us were
in the house. The Turks leaped from their horses and took four brothers
and one sister captive. Brother Joseph Müller tried to run from them and
escape, but a Turk chased after him on horseback, shot at him, and brought
him back.
While they held us by the scruff of the neck, we thought of God's
church community and of our parents. Perhaps we would never see them
again in this life, and they would not know where we had been taken. In
our distress, we called earnestly to God - not speaking aloud but praying
from our hearts - that he might come to our help and rescue us out of this
danger. And indeed, God heard our plea and intervened in an amazing way,
so that we were all freed almost before we realized. Here follows an
account of our release.
The Turks were going on to Gredinari and Ogreseen, and it was
inconvenient to take prisoners on foot along with them. We would be a
hindrance to their swift advance. So they began asking us who we were
and where we came from. When we told them we were Germans who had
come from Transylvania only two years before, they said, Don't be afraid.
You can stay here in peace. The Germans are on our side. None, of us are
going to hurt you. And they let us free, telling us to go back to our house.
They thought we would believe them as easily as that, and would stay until
they returned and could take us along as their prisoners. Since they had
been traveling all night and were very hot and thirsty, they asked for water
to drink. We were glad to bring them some. At the same time an old Turk
began urging them to move on. They obeyed him and rode off together.
As we now had the opportunity to flee, we did not miss our chance,
but set off at once and crossed the river to join our dear brothers and
sisters in the woods. Between fear and joy we related how frightened and
hard-pressed we had been and how mercifully God had saved us from the
hands of our enemies. Together we prayed and gave thanks and praise to
him.
Soon afterwards we saw how our enemies returned with their booty. A
vast number of people and cattle had been seized and compelled to go with

them. We heard the pitiful cries, people weeping and lamenting, and cattle
bellowing. It echoed through the woods and our hearts ached to hear it.
When the enemy reached our house again, intending to take us with
the other prisoners, they found no one there and had to leave emptyhanded.
Those of us who had been captured by the enemy were Michel,
Christian, and Paul Hofer, unmarried brothers from the same family;
Joseph Müller and Johannes Waldner, also unmarried; and Anna Waldner,
Johannes' mother. Michel, Paul, and Joseph have fallen asleep in the Lord;
the others are still alive at the time of writing, 1794.
Praise and thanks, honor and glory to God, who in his mercy saved us
from the hands and might of our enemies, who spared his children from
being carried off with other people of that country and taken into Turkish
slavery.
As we have said, the Turks now drove before them the Wallachian
country people and those from the Turkish border who had tried to find
refuge inland. They and their cattle were driven back to Giurgiu. Men,
women, and children were loaded onto their own wagons, some bound, but
some without bonds. Some had to drive the cattle and others the wagons
loaded with women and children. The Turkish soldiers, all mounted, rode
behind them so that no one could escape.
On reaching Giurgiu, groups of captives were locked up in various
houses and were brought next day to the market to be sold. Many Turkish
merchants had come over the Danube to Giurgiu on the previous day in
order to buy human beings and cattle. The terrible sale began. Some
bought the human beings, some the cattle. A number bought several
complete families, with the intention of taking them further into Turkey
for resale.
Some bought only father and son, parting them from the mother,
brothers, and sisters. Some bought only a mother and daughter. In short,
every buyer took what he wanted. There was no compassion, no sympathy,

no consideration for family relationships; the people were torn from one
another, separated and scattered to different places without a trace of pity.
The strongest young men sold for seventy, eighty, and even ninety leu.
One leu is worth about sixty kopecks or one German gulden. Old men and
women and children were somewhat cheaper, each according to
appearance and physical condition. A Wallachian who had been there
described it to us firsthand. He had already been resold twice, when
opportunity came to escape by night from his third master. Several days
later, he returned to us from Giurgiu.
Soon after these raids, we left our winter camp in the woods and set
out on our journey. We had lived in Wallachia for two and a half years.
Although the country is naturally fruitful, with fertile soil, the greater part
of our stay was not a good time for us. We went through a period of severe
sickness when we first arrived. Later, in the turmoil of wartime, we
endured much fear and suffering. Our sojourn there was full of sorrow,
toil, and hardship, as has already been sufficiently described.
***************

1770 Move from Wallachia to Russian
Now I will continue the history of our church community by
describing what took place on the journey through Wallachia, Moldavia &
Poland to Vishenka in the Ukraine
On April 10, 1770, the little flock set out. The previous day some of
us went back one last time across the Arges river to Presetschain to fetch a
few things from our houses. Everything delighted us with its beauty in the
pleasant spring weather. All kinds of birds were singing sweetly in the
green woods; the fields and meadows were covered with green grass
mingled with many different flowers; wild brier, hawthorn, wild plum,
sloe, and many trees were in full bloom, so that we found it very hard to
leave such a beautiful, fruitful district.

On the other hand, there was something depressing about the area, for
not one human being or farm animal was to be heard or seen. All had fled.
Poor as we were, we had five wagons with a pair of oxen for each, and
a few cows, calves, and sheep to take with us. We loaded as much of the
Turkish wheat as was practical to transport, then sold the rest, and took to
the road in God's name, full of hope and trust in him.
We were confident that through his holy angels he would guard and
guide us until we reached the place he had in mind for us to settle
according to his divine will.
Many times on our journey we were keenly aware of God's leading
and protection. Although we met setbacks and were sometimes short of
food and drink, our faithful, loving Father always intervened in moments
of need and graciously made a way for us to overcome our difficulties.
Praise and honor be to him in all eternity!
We passed Bucharest just before dawn, and on the sixth day of our
journey, Easter Sunday, we approached the city of Buzau. *
Here the Russian soldiers and all the people were preparing to flee,
terrified by reports that the Turks would attack. The encounter actually
took place; the Russian soldiers were killed and the people from the town
and surrounding villages were captured and driven off with their cattle
into Turkey. We did not hear of this until four days later for we had turned
aside from the high road when brothers had come back from the town with
news of the imminent danger. The next morning we had gone to the left
into the mountains, where we stayed quietly for two days in a hidden spot
between two streams. **
On the third day we started out again, returning to the high road. The
next day, as we reached a little market village called Rimnicu-sarat, we
heard of the Turkish attack that had taken place on Buzau and the
surrounding district two days before. How close we had come to this
calamity ourselves! We praised God for his help, protection, and
deliverance. ***

We went on from Rimnicu-sarat and after three days we reached
Focsani, the frontier town between Wallachia and Moldavia.
From Focsani we traveled for about a week until we arrived at Roman
on April 29. Here we had to stop for a whole week. A river called the
Moldava had overflowed its banks and broken the pontoon bridge. We had
to wait until the bridge was repaired and we could cross. ****
Leaving Roman, we first came to the River Siret and then to Targufrumos.I We bypassed Jassy, the capital city, where the Prince of Moldavia
has his residence, and leaving it on our right we bore left for Botosani,
which we reached on May 7 or 8. *****
There was a virulent outbreak of pestilence raging in Botosani and its
neighborhood. We saw that most of the houses were empty of people, and
dead bodies were lying unburied in the fields. Quantities of clothing and
bedding lay scattered here and there on the road, but no one had any desire
to gather it up.
Four days later, we came to the River Prut, and on May 19, we at last
reached the forest near Khotin, a city on the River Dniester on the border
between Moldavia and Poland. (Khotin, 53 miles [85 km] north of
Botosani)
This was an extremely difficult and tiring journey. We rarely found a
roof to shelter us at night and for the most part we slept under the open
sky, often in wind and rain. Although some of us crept into or under the
wagons, there was not enough room for everyone. In addition, we were
very poorly provided with coats and wraps, for we had little clothing left
after the robbery. Wherever we found a place with wood, water, and
grazing for the cattle, we camped there for the night.
We had only two meals a day, at midday and evening. Throughout the
journey, our food consisted of nothing but balukas and fresh milk. We were
very glad to have the cows and sheep to give us the milk. Bread was out of
the question; it was unobtainable. If we were able to buy millet and
Turkish wheat, we were happy just to satisfy our hunger with balukas.

Sometimes we had to go without even that. It was never possible for
the elders to encourage the people on their way with a drink of brandy,
wine, or beer; we had to content ourselves with water.
We often said to one another, If a time ever comes again when we can
eat our fill of dry bread, we will be content to work our hardest and will
never cease thanking God for it.
Now God has blessed us and allowed us to live in better times, so that
for twenty-four years we have not only had plenty of bread, but of houses
and clothing, too. We have enjoyed a time of peace and received meat,
brandy, beer, and many other good things from God. How content and
thankful we should be! When people nowadays are dissatisfied and
grumble at times, even though he gives them all these good gifts, how will
they answer before God? The teaching from the wise man Sirach should be
taken to heart: In the time of plenty think of the time of hunger; in days of
wealth think of poverty and need. From morning to evening conditions
change; all things move swiftly before the Lord. Think how swiftly times
changed for the devout Job!
For the rest, Moldavia is just as fertile a country as Wallachia. In
some respects it is better, for the air is fresher. There are mountains and
valleys abounding in springs and rivers, while in Wallachia there is more
level land and in places wide moors with not enough water. Moldavia is
also well forested and has plenty of meadows, arable land, and pasture.
Twice we came to forests of nut trees.
Once we passed by a mountainside with a dip or hollow in it. Around
the dell, twelve to fourteen springs welled up cold and crystal-clear from
the mountain. Their waters mingled to make a sizable brook that drove a
mill built in the stream.
Once we camped for the night at a similar place with nine or ten
springs in a small area. Yet for the most part this fertile country was
deserted, for it was cruelly oppressed. The prince of Moldavia paid the
Turkish sultan a fixed tribute in money. Anything else the prince could
extort was to his own profit.

***************

1770 Quarantined at Khotin
Now to come back to our community history. As was said, we
reached the Polish frontier and encamped in a wood a half-mile from
Khotin. Here we heard there would be a delay in crossing the border,
because news had come from all sides about the widespread pestilence in
Moldavia. No one was allowed to cross into the Kingdom of Poland until
they had been in quarantine for six weeks. This naturally applied to us,
too. We were greatly troubled that we could not travel straight on but must
lose time staying in Khotin. Our provisions were already almost
exhausted, and we still had a long journey in front of us. To make matters
worse, there was little food to be bought in Khotin and prices were very
high. We had enough to ration our meals strictly for three weeks and then
run short. All this, however, was foreseen by God, and as time went on he
changed everything to his people's good.
During these weeks, Count Peter Rumiantsev, a field marshal in the
Russian Imperial Army, advanced from Poland with all his troops. He
crossed the Dniester into Moldavia and pitched camp outside Khotin. One
day brother Joseph Kuhr, Paul Glanzer, and Elias Wipf were sent into
Khotin to represent the community's plight to General Weiss, who was the
commanding officer in the town. They were stopped by the guards and
sent from one officer to another, having to explain who they were, where
they came from, and what they wanted. They answered truthfully and
showed the safe-conduct from General Sametin in Bucharest. Finally, a
mounted soldier was sent with them to escort them to General Weiss in the
town. When they arrived, the general was not at home. The major for the
garrison and a few lords from the state government read the pass and sent
another soldier with them. He took them out of town and put them under
guard. There they had to remain for several days with nothing
accomplished.

When the brothers did not return as expected, the community became
very anxious, not knowing what had happened to delay them.
Brother Joseph Kleinsasser and Lorenz Tschetter were asked to go
after the three brothers to make inquiries and find out where they might be
and how they were faring. The two set out in God's name. When they
reached the guard post they, too, were detained; they were taken from one
officer to another in the camp and actually reached the field marshal. He
asked them
in detail who they were, where they were from, and where they
wished to go. The brothers explained our situation to the count; they told
him we had had to leave Wallachia because of the war and now wanted to
go to Kiev in Russia, but we were prevented from traveling further. The
count said, I will speak with General Weiss and he will see that you are
given some help. Stay with me overnight and I will send you off tomorrow.
But you must speak to the commanding officer yourselves. He gave orders
for food to be brought for the brothers, and this was done. The next
morning they had to wait until nearly noon. Then a soldier was sent to
escort them to General Weiss in Khotin. When they reached the town, the
general was again absent from home. The major for the garrison and the
councilmen sent them with another soldier to join the three brothers
already under guard. They all had to remain at the guard post, unable to do
anything except wait for an opportunity to see the general.
Then the troops broke camp in Khotin and moved further into
Moldavia, as far as the River Prut. General Weiss accompanied them. As
he was riding back into town with several officers, the brothers stood
watching for him. Brother Joseph Kuhr held up the pass from General
Sametin. The general and his officers halted, called the brothers to them,
and asked what they wanted. The brothers told of our plight and brought
forward our request, while the general and his officers listened patiently.
They had great sympathy for us and said it was always like this in
wartime.
General Weiss kindly took up our cause. Brother Joseph; Kuhr and
Paul Glanzer had to remain under guard, but the other three brothers were
allowed to return home. The general gave orders for a soldier to

accompany them to our camp in the woods and bring us all to the guard
post. We were to stay there for the three remaining weeks of quarantine.
He promised to provide us with bread from the city storehouse and to
protect us from molestation.
We therefore broke camp, moved to the guard post near Khotin,
where our brothers were held, and set up again on an open hilltop near a
bulwark. Every day we received a bushel of flour from the city. In
addition, we were given an old Turkish tent, which served us well as a
shelter from wind and rain. After we came to know General Weiss better,
we told him that we did not have the means to continue our journey to
Russia and were in need of help. He replied that he would report this to the
field marshal, for any help must have his permission.
When the field marshal was informed, it turned out he had already
noticed us, and he sent a lieutenant to ask if we would move to his estate
in the Ukraine. He offered to advance us whatever we required, but would
expect repayment.
The elders of the church considered the offer and felt it came through
God's intervention - as it undoubtedly did. They consented on condition
that the field marshal would promise us freedom to maintain our religious
faith and teaching and to practice them without hindrance. We wrote down
the principle articles of our Christian faith that had resulted in our
persecution in the Holy Roman Empire, and we sent these to the field
marshal. As he found no fault with them and agreed to let us practice our
faith unhindered, he forwarded the following contract to us from his camp
near the Prut.
***************

1770 Privileges granted to the colonists
Privileges to be granted to the colonists with the intent of settlement
in Vishenka

1. They shall have full freedom to practice their religion: they are
never to be compelled to swear an oath either in a court of law or
elsewhere.
2. They are never to be employed for military service.
3. No one may prevent or hinder them from living in community, and
they are permitted to work and pay taxes communally.
4. They will be given complete tax exemption for three years.
5. They will receive necessities on credit, including a bushel of flour
for the whole group each day.
6. They will be provided with thirty rubles for their journey and with
whatever is necessary on their arrival in Vishenka. In addition, they will
receive money and wood for building on credit.
7. After the three years' exemption, they will pay a fixed rent on the
land assigned to them for cultivation, hay-making, and raising garden
crops, etc.
8. Each is free to work for his own livelihood. They are not allowed to
form a guild. They are free to sell whatever they produce.
9. Their freedom may not be restricted in any way. If at any time the
owner of the estate or they themselves should no longer wish the
community to remain on the aforementioned property, they shall be
permitted to move away; but they must first pay off all goods and money
advanced, plus a tenth of the value of the resources they have acquired.
10. After the three free years, they shall pay taxes in cash on land and
houses.
11. At hay-making, eighty wagon loads of hay shall be allotted to
them for their cattle.
12. As they cannot complete the construction of the necessary
buildings before winter, temporary housing will be provided for them.

In Camp by the Prut in the District of Rabog
June 1770

The elders and the whole community were well-satisfied when they
received the contract. The Khotin city officials wrote this to the field
marshal, enclosing a list of the names of the brothers, sisters, and children,
and of the various crafts practiced by members of the community.
***************

1770 The brothers escorted and provided for
Then the field marshal sent a sergeant with ten Cossacks from the
camp under order to escort us through the Kingdom of Poland and all the
way to his estate in the village of Vishenka. When the escort arrived, the
six-week period of quarantine was just over, so we left Khotin on June 29
and crossed the Dnieper River into the Kingdom of Poland. We had been
given two wagons in Khotin, and they were drawn by post horses from one
post house to the next.
The sergeant was a young German from Livonia. He grew to like us
very much and showed us much kindness on the journey through Poland.
He had orders to buy bread for us - but had no need to buy much. As he
approached a village at noon or toward evening, he sent his Cossacks on
ahead. They told the village justice of the peace, The field marshals people
are coming and should be provided with something to eat. The justice of
the peace then sent a message to every householder to supply some bread
and cooked food. By the time we arrived, the people had already delivered
their bread and other food, and we and the Cossacks had plenty to eat.
With God's help we journeyed on through Poland for three weeks
without a single difficulty or accident. On July 19 we reached the Russian
frontier along the mighty Dnieper River. We crossed by boat and stayed for

two days in the town of Pereyslav. Then we continued our journey and at
last, on August 1 according to the new calendar, we came to the village of
Vishenka on the River Desna. *
The first night after our arrival we camped up the valley by the fence
on this side of the bridge. The next day the sergeant gave us into the care
of the steward of the estate at Vishenka, with written instructions from the
count how we should be looked after and provided with all necessities. The
officials diligently followed out these orders.
We were given two or three unoccupied houses between the old
church and the new at the upper end of the village, and we used them to
accommodate our children and sick people. Every day we received a
bushel of flour to make bread, some peas, and other necessities.
Since we were to settle in this place, we were allowed to choose a site
that we thought agreeable and suitable for our buildings. The elders of the
church went out to look around, and liked our present site more than any
other. We have now been living here for twenty-four years. At that time,
however, it was a level field stretching right to our neighbor's fence. When
the officials approved the place, too, we decided to build our community
there.
The season came for seeding the winter wheat. We were shown the
fields and told to take as many acres as we wanted. We were also taken to
see the great meadows up on the island. As they were ready to cut, we
mowed them and made hay. The bailiff gave us seeds, but we lacked plows
and harrows, so the peasants in the village had to lend them to us. We used
our own teams for plowing.
On his estate at Vishenka, the count had a civil engineer; or master
builder who was in charge of all construction in the area. He received
orders to assist us with our building, and he planned the big house where
we now live, the dining room, carpenter's shop, kitchen, and storeroom for
flour and bread. He employed four carpenters with other helpers, but there
was no hope of finishing anything before the cold weather and it would
have been difficult to winter over in the peasants' cramped houses in the

village, so we were provided with sleeping quarters in two big rooms and
some smaller rooms on the count's manor farm near Tschereschink.
As the few clothes we had were in pitiful condition and winter was at
our door, the officials gave us fifty prepared sheepskins for garments. The
furrier had to cut them out and show us how to sew them. Everything we
received from these people was carefully recorded by both the officials
and the community, and a few years later when we had grown somewhat
more prosperous, we paid it all back.
We began little by little to set up our spinning and weaving, and
provide the bare necessities for running our household. Even though we
were in great poverty and very poorly fed that winter, we were well
content and thanked God that he had once again given us a little place to
live in peace and safety.
This concludes the account of the, wonderful ways and means by
which God intervened to bring the Church of the Lord into the Ukraine.
***************

1771 What happened to those imprisoned in Transylvania
Now I must say a little about what happened to the brothers and
sisters imprisoned in Hermannstadt in Transylvania, and how they were
released and came to the church community in Russia. *
In May 1771, Field Marshal Count Rumiantsev sent a colonel from
Wallachia (where the Russian army was at that time) to inspect his estates
in the Ukraine. The colonel, whose name was Carl Ivan, had negotiated
with us at Khotin. He now came to Vishenka and among other business
inquired into our present circumstances. After carrying out his
commission, he prepared to return to the count in Wallachia.
When the older brothers heard of this, they did not want to miss such
an opportunity. They approached the colonel in a friendly way and asked if

he would be kind enough to take one of our brothers to Wallachia with
him, for we had a great longing to visit our imprisoned brothers and sisters
in Transylvania. The colonel agreed, and brother Paul Glanzer was chosen
for the task. After the church community had taken leave of him, Paul set
out in God's name to travel with the colonel to Wallachia. From there he
made his way over the mountains into Transylvania, passing through
Kronstadt and arriving safely in Hermannstadt. He visited the brothers and
sisters imprisoned in the town hall and greeted them in the name of the
whole church. Then he recounted what had happened in Wallachia and on
the journey to Russia. It was a great joy and comfort to the prisoners to
know that the church community of the Lord was still together and at
peace. They had heard how we had been plundered and stripped of all we
had by the soldiers in Wallachia, but they had received no news of us
since.
The prisoners were hopeful of being released and sent out of the
country, because a good friend had helped Andreas Wurz's two daughters
to write to the empress in Vienna, telling her of the long years they had
been imprisoned, although innocent. (The two sisters had been in the
penitentiary since 1758.) The empress then had the case investigated and
sent orders to the councilmen in Hermannstadt that those detained so long
for the sake of their faith should now be freed and banished from the
country. Both the Lutheran and Roman Catholic members of the city
council would gladly have done this long before if they had not been afraid
of the Jesuit, Delphini. Even now he tried to prevent the Hutterites' release
- which was why it was so long delayed - but at last he gave consent for
the Carinthian emigrants to be exiled. However, he intended to detain
Anna Wipf and her daughter because they came from Alwinz. He also
threatened to seize Paul Glanzer's little daughter, Susanna, who had been
born in prison, and to put her into an orphanage. But God did not allow
him to take her. He defeated Delphini's plans through the opposition of
several councilmen.
It was in these circumstances that Paul Glanzer met the prisoners.
Unable to risk being seen, he did not stay long. With tear-filled eyes and a
heavy heart he took leave of his wife and daughter, of his brother by blood,
Martin Glanzer, and of all the brothers and sisters. He traveled back past

Kronstadt and over the mountains into Wallachia, safely rejoining the
colonel in Bucharest. As he hoped that the brothers and sisters would soon
be sent out of Transylvania, he wished to remain in the city for a time and
wait for them.
The Jesuit Delphini had let it be known that he meant to keep the
sisters from Alwinz in custody, so Anna Wipf and her, daughter Gretel
quietly slipped away from the town hall (for they were no longer strictly
guarded but could go in and out by day as they wished). They followed
brother Paul Glanzer toward Kronstadt, and God helped them safely over
the mountains and on to Bucharest. There in the marketplace they ran into
brother Paul, who had just come to buy a bridle. The colonel had given
him a horse and he planned to leave Bucharest for Jassy that same day. He
had given up the idea of waiting and meant to set out for the community in
Russia.
It can well be imagined what joy and relief the sisters felt on finding
brother Paul. The three of them thanked and praised God with all their
hearts.
On hearing from brother Paul about the sisters' arrival, the colonel
exchanged the horse for a wagon and pair of oxen. With these the three
traveled from Bucharest to Jassy, where they stayed until the spring of
1772. During this time brother 1772 Paul wrote to the community in
Russia to explain what was happening to him and to the prisoners. Since
none of those left in Hermannstadt had yet followed them, the three took
the next opportunity to travel to Russia. With God's protection they
arrived safely at Vishenka on July 9, 1772, and we welcomed them with
joy and thanksgiving.
***************

1772 Prisoners release
The other brothers and sisters had to wait patiently in the town hall
until God should provide a way out. The two sisters had not been missed

for several days after their disappearance from prison. When the Jesuit
heard they were gone, he was almost beside himself with rage at their
escape from his clutches. The guards on duty at the time were put in irons.
The remaining brothers and sisters were guarded much more strictly and
no longer allowed to go in and out as before. The jailer, usually a kindly
man with sympathy for our people, had to hear many hard things said
against him. This severity soon vanished, however, and our prisoners were
treated as leniently as before.
They had to wait another whole year for their release, however. This
was due to orders coming from the empress that the prisoners should first
receive the property they had inherited and then be exiled from the country
without further hindrance. As the officials took a great deal of time to
wind up the prisoners' affairs, their release was delayed until the end of
1772.
At long last the time came. December 21, 1772, was set for their
departure. Mathies Hofer had been imprisoned for sixteen years in the
penitentiary in Hermannstadt; Martin and Christian Glanzer with the three
sisters Barbara, Maria, and Margarethe, had been five years in the town
hall.
The general in command gave them a pass and let their inherited
property be forwarded to Russia. A team of horses was provided and
soldiers were sent with them for safe conduct from one village to another
as far as the Rote Term on the frontier.
But the three single sisters remained behind in Hermannstadt. They
had been imprisoned right at the beginning, like Mathies Hofer, and had
remained in the penitentiary for fifteen years. It is certainly sad and
disturbing that they now lost their first love and zeal and fell completely
away. Through many long years of suffering they had fought fearlessly and
uprightly for the divine truth, defending their faith with joyful courage
before spiritual and lay authorities, testifying to the truth in front of
everyone. They had refused to let threats or bullying intimidate them, and
no friendly advances or promises of worldly goods and riches could turn
them aside.

Yet at the end, they began to give way and fell. After their release,
when they were free to go about in the town, they found themselves
husbands, went over to the Lutheran church and married. Christina
remained firm to the last moment. She prepared to travel with the others
and her name was listed of the pass. When her suitor heard this, he came
to her in tears began persuading her with a flood of honeyed words, and
wouldn't stop until he had broken down her defenses. She had her name
crossed off the pass, remained behind with her sister, and married as
Elisabeth had done. But the three found little happiness, and things went
very badly for them. Over and above everything else, they were never free
from a bad conscience, gnawing worm in their hearts because of their
unfaithfulness, until they no longer attended the Lutheran church or its
sacrament but confessed once more that their previous faith was the divine
truth. They would gladly have returned to the church community if they
had been free and not bound to another. But one cannot mock God.
Anna Egerter and Christina died soon afterwards. Christina left a
daughter who came to the church community in Russia seventeen years
later with Elisabeth Straus. This story will be told at the appropriate time.
The brothers and sisters banished from Transylvania made their way
with God's help into Wallachia and reached Bucharest in safety. The
Russian commander-in-chief then assisted them to travel on to Jassy in
Moldavia. Here they informed the field marshal, Count Rumiantsev, of
their arrival. He gave them a non-commissioned officer as escort and paid
for them to travel in midwinter by mail coach to his estate at Vishenka in
the Ukraine.
They reached us on January 26, 1773, an occasion for great joy and
thanksgiving. We felt their coming was a gift and blessing from God.
Now I will take up the thread of my narrative again.
***************

1771 Beginning of community at Vishenka

Account of Further Events of Importance for the Church at Vishenka,
1771-1781
We were now lodging in the count's manor farm and we remained
there until our own house was built. Before the end of that autumn, we
managed to have barns for the cattle and to do some other things to help us
through the cold weather. Several brothers and sisters who looked after the
animals stayed all through the winter at our own farm (where the house
was still under construction).
On July 20, 1771, we once more gathered under one roof with one
kitchen. On July 24, the first meeting was held in the newly built house.
On April 16, 1772, we joyfully held the Lord's Supper in blessed
memory of our dear Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, to thank him for all his
love and compassion. During the disturbances and troubles of 1770 and
1771 we had not been able to hold it.
In January 1773, the Almighty God in his grace brought us all
together for the first time: those from Kreuz, from Stein, from Alwinz, and
from Hermannstadt. We had all longed to gather in the unity of the Spirit
while in Transylvania, but had been prevented by the hostility, envy, and
hatred of godless men. The brothers from Stein would gladly have moved
to Kreuz when the brotherhoods united, but the villagers would not allow
it. The Jesuit had had the Alwinz families forcibly removed from Kreuz by
government authority. Some had been imprisoned in Hermannstadt the
whole time we were in Transylvania (as is described in sufficient detail
above). Until this year, it had never been possible for us all to gather in
one place.
The whole church community of God rejoiced that he had led us
together. We praised and thanked him from the depths of our hearts. All
the believers were firmly resolved to live in true peace and unity, serving
God and their brothers and sisters in Christian, brotherly love, one helping
to strengthen another in faith, working zealously for Christian community
in both spiritual and temporal matters (as the highest commandment of
love).

***************

1773 Disputes started by Mathies Hofer
Satan never rests, however. As Peter says, he continually prowls
around the house of God like a roaring lion. He is always trying to cause
confusion and to hinder the believers from carrying out the Lord's work
and serving him. He strives unceasingly to sever the bond of love and
peace. So the Enemy was hard at work now, but without success. Although
he made his attack very subtly, in the guise of an angel, and as if it were
deeply spiritual, he failed completely. This will be seen from the account
of what took place. I will give a truthful and thorough report of how the
trouble arose - not in every detail, but explaining the main points.
Soon after the brothers from Hermannstadt arrived, a sharp
disagreement developed between the brothers from Kreuz and those from
Stein, so that the little flock was nearly torn in two and would have
divided if the Lord had not especially protected us.
The disagreement and division was caused by Mathies Hofer. He was,
in many respects, a very zealous and deeply spiritual man who, to use a
familiar phrase, knew the whole Bible as well as he knew the Lord's
Prayer. He knew the entire book of Psalms by heart, as well as every
chapter in the Old and New Testament that contained a prayer. At the
beginning, before he went too far, he did much to establish the community,
strengthening and encouraging us in many ways. During his time in prison
he composed many spiritual songs, nearly thirty if all were counted. He
had written out books which the brothers from Alwinz had sent us to copy,
and we have a great number of copies in his beautiful handwriting. For all
these reasons the brothers had a high regard for him and loved him very
much, especially Hans Kleinsasser, the church Elder, who followed his
advice in almost everything. As time went on, however, this did not turn
out for the best.

In Psalm 119:62 it is written, At midnight I will rise to give thanks,
and in Psalm 134:1, David says, Praise the Lord, all you servants of the
Lord who watch by night in the house of the Lord. These verses led
Mathies Hofer to introduce a new practice into the church community:
Every night two brothers were to be on watch, one before and the other
after midnight. At midnight the first had to waken all the brothers and
sisters for prayer. Mathies wanted them to dress and gather in the meeting
room, but as this was not fitting, people simply knelt up in bed. One of
them led the prayer by speaking it aloud; the others participated in silence.
All took turns to lead the prayer: the single brothers and sisters according
to rules, the married people alternating with each other. If anyone was
sleepy, the others roused him. This practice continued for some years in
Russia, until about 1782, but now it has long been given up and forgotten.
Each one is free to make his own judgment on this practice.
Prompted by Mathies' advice, Hans Kleinsasser also started the
practice in the community for prayer to take place morning, noon, and
evening, the married brothers in one group, the married sisters in another,
the unmarried brothers together, and the unmarried sisters together. In the
midday meetings there was not only prayer, but reading, too. Those
present took turns to read as well as to lead the prayer.
In addition, there were two meetings a day. Early in the morning
before breakfast, everyone was called to prayer. At this meeting there was
simply the common prayer, led by the Elder, without any preface, reading,
or singing. Later, when Joseph Kuhr returned, he read a short preface
before the prayer. After the people rose from prayer they gave one another
the greeting of peace. Brothers embraced brothers and sisters embraced
sisters. Brothers and sisters did not embrace each other, but only shook
hands when they greeted one another, as is directed in the church's
Confession of Faith. This took place every morning. Then they had
breakfast.
In the evening before supper, everyone was called to prayer again,
and the servant of the Word read from the Psalms of David in the Bible.
He began at the first and went through them in order, meeting by meeting.
When he had reached the last, he began at the beginning again. After the

prayer, one or two chapters from the Bible or passages from some other
book were read. After this came a song. Then we sat down to supper. The
community at Kreuz had begun this daily order of prayer meetings while
still in Transylvania, and it was continued for some years in Russia. After
Hans Kleinsasser's death (1779), the servant of the Word no longer used
the Psalms for daily prayer. The early morning meeting was also
discontinued and we made our common prayer only once a day, at the
evening meeting, as we still do today.
This Mathies Hofer, after reading the story of Mordecai and Haman,
also concluded that we should not remove our hats in the presence of
magistrates, nor should we greet unbelievers. (Esther 3:2) He supported
his ideas with so many texts from Holy Scripture that not a brother in the
church community could dispute with him. Everyone had to go along with
his opinions. It was customary among people in general for a man to take
off his hat when nobles were present and to greet neighbors in their homes
or on the street. When Mathies and the other brothers in the community
ceased this practice, they caused great offense. It was regarded as defiant,
stubborn behavior and certainly did little to honor God's name or to
convince others that they should lead a better life. We continued the
custom when first in Russia, but after we received our church chronicle
from Transylvania, we read about our dear forefathers (whose faith,
teaching, and religion we affirm as our own). We found that they had given
greetings, and also that they had never caused offense to lay magistrates
by refusing to take off their hats. It is certain that if they had refused, they
could not have avoided provoking the lay officials. The offense they
caused to priests and spiritual authorities is recorded in great detail. We
therefore decided to keep to our old beliefs and practices on these points.
Mathies Hofer also began insisting on the basis of Holy Scripture that
it is not right to work for an unbeliever in return for wages, because it
helps him amass private property. This was why we stopped working for
the villagers in Kreuz. They grew more hostile to us when we were no
longer of any service, for the one thing they had liked about us was that we
had worked hard for them.

As time passed, Mathies went so far as to write and speak against the
church's Confession of Faith, especially against the brothers' way of
observing Sunday. They had kept it as a day of rest, though not for the sake
of a commandment. To avoid angering ignorant people and giving them
reason to revile us, they had refrained from practical work and occupied
themselves with the Lord's Word. Mathies wrote that, on this point, the
brothers wanted to be better than Christ. Christ healed on the Sabbath
although it offended the Pharisees. In the Confession it sounded as if
Christ had not acted rightly because he had not avoided provoking them,
etc. Mathies could sway brother Hans Kleinsasser to his way of thinking
on every question, and now he managed to persuade the whole brotherhood
to follow his ideas in this, too, and to turn away from our forefathers'
Confession of Faith. Sunday mornings were devoted to preaching and
instruction in the faith, but the afternoon was used for communal work.
The village would not tolerate this, and we were forbidden to work on
Sunday; but we continued nonetheless. The justice of the peace and other
freemen from the village came and took our work away from us. The
community still would not give in.
Many brothers were not happy about it. They believed we should keep
to the church's statement of faith and not make innovations. But such
opinions were discounted at the time.
While we were in Wallachia, serious disagreement arose on this point
between the brothers from Kreuz and those from Stein. Brother Peter
Müller was strongly opposed to the new arrangement and urged us to hold
to the guidelines and Confession of Faith written down by brothers in
earlier days. The brothers from Stein gave in for the sake of peace, united
with the brotherhood, and again took part in Sunday afternoon work with
the others. But Peter Müller would not be coerced into working; he sat
reading the Holy Scriptures in the afternoon, too. This made him appear
obstinate and opinionated. He was never reconciled with the brotherhood
but held to his own convictions until he fell asleep in the Lord on
December 8, 1769.
I will leave each God-fearing reader to decide for himself which
attitude was right. Sunday work was gradually dropped in Russia, and now

we do only what is absolutely necessary: herding cattle in summer, for
instance, feeding stock in winter, cooking, working in the distillery or in
the mill.
These and other points not mentioned here were raised while the
community was still in Transylvania. The longer Mathies went on, the
more extreme he became. After the community had left the country, he
started on the brothers and sisters imprisoned with him and wanted
everyone to give up silent, personal prayer. Instead they were all to pray
together. In his opposition to personal prayer in silence, he declared that it
was idolatry, a sacrifice offered to the devil: people who prayed in this
way were dumb dogs unable to bark. He compared it to, the Roman
Catholic mass, to burying talents, to the foolish virgins, to a dog in a
manger that cannot eat hay himself but grudges it to the cow. Even when
the others consented to pray together he was not satisfied unless they
would admit that silent, personal prayer was devil's work. The brothers
and sisters could not agree to this, so he separated himself and was no
longer at peace with them. In 1768 when brother Joseph Kuhr and Paul
Glanzer came from Wallachia to visit the prisoners in Hermannstadt, they
found Mathies already disunited with the others. I will include a letter he
wrote to the brotherhood in Wallachia, so that everyone can see for
himself how he twisted the Scriptures to fit his own ideas. He first writes
about other matters, unrelated to this question, so for brevity's sake I will
omit the beginning of the letter.
***************

1768 Mathies Hofer's letter from Hermannstadt
Hermannstadt, May 22, 1768 (1768) Mathies, a prisoner in the Lord,
to the dear brothers and sisters in Wallachia, to dear brother Hans
Kleinsasser, to Andreas Wurz, and those from Alwinz.
Grace and peace be to you from God the Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ; the joy of the Holy Spirit be with all who call upon the Name of the

Lord....
Beloved brother Hans, and Andreas, and all brothers and sisters in the
Lord, I ask you with all my heart not to be too saddened and disturbed by
my letter. I am writing it in deep sorrow and with many tears. I am in
anguish about the four sisters in the penitentiary and those imprisoned in
the town hall. They have all deserted me simply because I say, Your prayer
should be made openly before God, because I tell them they should pray
all together, each helping the other according to the Spirit working within
them.
I have done it in fear for us all, since we are never free from daily
temptation. I admonished them as a Christian should do, pointing out that
when taken into the temples of false gods, they should pray aloud to God,
not pray as the others do who know nothing of him, and who remain as
silent as their idols. For Christ says in Matthew 6, In your meetings you
must not be like the hypocrites, and Paul says in 1 Corinthians 14, How is
it, then, brothers? When you come together each one has a psalm, a lesson,
tongue, a revelation, or an interpretation. Let everything be done for the
betterment of others. At home, too, you should pray aloud together, as
Christ says, If two agree about anything they ask, it will be done for them
by my Father in heaven. The disunited and rebellious shall not raise their
voices together, they have cut themselves off like those excluded from the
Church; for where two or three are gathered in my name, I am there among
them.
The sisters do not want to gather for prayer; they do not want to pray
aloud to God in front of others as Christ himself did and Paul tells about.
They say they do not believe it is wrong to pray quietly by themselves.
Nor do they believe praying together is wrong.
To this I say that no one can serve two masters. If I pray quietly by
myself it delights the world and the devil, who do not want God's praise to
be spread far and wide. Therefore, do not conform to this world, but be
transformed by the renewal of your mind, so that you may not be
condemned with the world. We used to pray like this when we were Roman
Catholics and followed after dumb idols just as we were led. But now I
say, If you continue in your old ways and will not lift your voice in prayer,

you are like dumb idols, like dogs that are unable to bark, like the man
who kept his talent hidden in a cloth. You are like foolish virgins who will
not bring oil in their lamps nor buy it for themselves with gold - gold that
is the Word of God and should be used to strengthen one another in faith.
(1 Corinthians 12; Isaiah 56)
The sisters refuse to listen to me; they admonish me for my wrong
ideas, and Christina says they no longer have any confidence in what I say.
Elisabeth says they want to be low and humble; they do not believe silent
prayer is wrong. We only quarrel with each other and no improvement
comes of it. I have talked to them and admonished them the whole
summer long, as you know very well, dear brothers. I have told them that
they should pray together and strengthen one another. But from the very
first they opposed me. They called me a hypocrite when I prayed aloud to
God. After a time they have not answered me anymore. Neither have they
done what I said. (1 Thessalonians 5)
Now that the six brothers and sisters have been brought to the town
hall, I challenged the sisters in the penitentiary again, telling them that I
would like them and the others to unite with me to the praise of God; that I
longed for us to call on the Lord in our troubles here on earth as we will
later, when we are set free either by returning to the church community or
by entering eternal life. I said that I longed for us to praise the Lord
together in our grief and hardship here and to cleave to him together in our
times of trial. For we are all one with the Father and the Son, therefore we
should praise God here on earth as he is praised in heaven. In heaven we
will not praise the Lord with silent lips, but with loud voices. We pray in
the Lord's Prayer, Lord, your will be done on earth as in heaven. So we
should praise him here on earth as he is praised in heaven.
Christina says each must carry his own burden and render his own
account of himself. If this is the case, we would never have reason to
admonish one another! In Romans 14, Paul is speaking about unbelievers
who do not accept the Scriptures. He wishes to prevent quarrels and false
judgments between believers and unbelievers and he therefore tells each
person to keep to his own opinion when unable to approve of someone

else's. Seeing that the sisters would not obey me, but opposed me, I told
them, If this is how things are, I can no longer be at peace with you.
I let Martin Glanzer and the brothers and sisters in the town hall
know about it. Martin replied that he found terms like dumb idols and
dumb dogs much too strong for people who pray quietly by themselves.
My answer: My dear Martin, I understand from sister Christina that you
find my letter too strong, but you did not point out where it is wrong. I
hope that the Lord's Word will not be too strong for you so you become
nauseated and come to loathe this worthless food. (Numbers 21:5) So I ask
you in love to indicate with a word or two what you find wrong. You
support your views by referring to the brothers or to church practices, but
not to Christ. The Corinthians cited their ministers, saying, I follow Paul, I
follow Apollos. The Gospel is not hidden from you. You can read it and
see for yourself.
I have spoken to the brothers as I told you in my previous letter. They
did not say I was wrong but got up and prayed at midnight. I know of the
single brothers in particular that they take turns leading the prayer, one
each night, and they say they find it very helpful. Even if they once
practiced private prayer, the brothers do not make out that it was right.
Things would with time have found a true order if persecution had not
interrupted us. We have already talked about it, and when I am back with
them this practice, too, will be introduced, God willing. We will speak
about it again.
I firmly represent that it is right and Christian to pray together day
and night, and I have no doubt that if you, dear brothers, were with me,
you would pray and sing with me just as Paul did with Silas (Acts 16). I
therefore pray to God the Father through Jesus Christ that he will lead us
together to his praise. It would bring us joy in our time of trouble if we
constantly gave praise together with one voice to God the Father through
our Lord Jesus Christ (Romans 15). For I affirm my recognition that if we
do not live, suffer, and give praise together in our grief and hardship here,
we will not be given joy together in his Church - either on earth or in the
life beyond, whichever God may will.

I openly testify that if anyone practices private prayer in order to
please himself, his prayers are such as only hypocrites use and rely upon.
How often I have heard this in the world - that I should go to church and
there pray quietly to myself as much as I liked. I am told the same in my
prison: I should pray in secret! They do not understand such things. I
answer, No, I want to acknowledge my Father freely and openly, just as
Christ himself did. We should do the same if we are obedient. (Romans
15:1-7; Luke 18:11; Matthew 6; Hebrews 5:7-9, 13:10)
Whatever fills a man's heart will brim over into his words. No one
lights a lamp and hides it away. Therefore prayer should not be in secret.
When God inspires someone to pray in the other way, he will also signify
his approval of that person's offering, just as he did with Abel's. Let your
light so shine before men that they see your good works. Do not let
yourself be misled. This is the Lord's command, and the one who is
unsettling your mind will bear God's judgment no matter who he is.
(Matthew 12:34; Psalm 40:10; Luke 11:33-36; 1 John 3; Matthew 5;
Galatians 5)
Martin sent me back the two letters. It was too much for him, he said;
if I could square my conscience with it, I could sever the bond of peace
between us. My answer: I am doing it to keep my conscience pure. I
cannot do otherwise if he flatly refuses to go into further proofs of the
truth. Martin said it was going too far; he was not going to make a
commandment out of it. I reply that I find no greater commandment than
to love (John 13) - that we should love one another. If anyone says he loves
God and hates his brother, he is a liar. Therefore, we should receive one
another just as Christ received us, to God's glory. We should not leave our
talent buried in the earth as the wicked servant did. We should bring our
offering, not to the Devil but to the Tent of the Presence. The Tent of the
Presence is Christ and the Church. His commandment is that we should
love one another. (Leviticus 17)
They say they cannot see why personal prayer is not right. Christina
often asks me how long this is to go on. My reply: Until we are reconciled.
They tell me they are perfectly ready to pray together and take turns to
lead the prayer in the way I want. I am glad for that. But at the same time

they say it is going too far when I assert that people who pray silently are
dumb dogs and graven images. I tell them silent prayer is the prayer of a
deceiver, of the wicked servant who hides his talent in the ground. They
say they only want to have peace between us. I reply, I cannot make peace
with you on such a basis. But if you are willing to talk it over and search
for true recognition, I will accept food and benefits from you in the hope
of an agreement.
On Easter Sunday the bookbinder, Weber, sent us some food. They
put my share in the dish they have always used for bringing my meals and
sent this and a drink of wine to me with the warder. Praise be to God!
On Monday, I asked Christina why she had not brought it herself. She
said I would not have taken it from them. But I thought they would have
brought the food in hope of an agreement. I said to her, Then I cannot let
you have the dish. In the evening, Christina came and asked me for it. I
said, If you will not be obedient, I will have nothing to do with you.
After I had received your letter, I twice asked them if they desired a
reconciliation. I told them to speak with Martin and with each other and
that then I would write to the brothers in the name of us all. They never
brought a reply from Martin. When I spoke to Elisabeth, she said they
wanted reconciliation, and that it was I who refused. My answer: I will
gladly be reconciled, only you must stop your loathsome idolatry. She said
that to talk about idols and dumb dogs in this connection was more than
they could accept. My answer: In my eyes there is just as little right about
the way you pray as there is about the Roman Catholic mass, for you pray
just as you please and give up sharing in common. The prophet (Daniel 11)
says, The king will do as he pleases. He will exalt and magnify himself
above everything of God. Prayer and the mass are powerful idols. They
have become so firmly established in the temple of God, and even among
us, that there was and is no rooting them out (2 Thessalonians 2). This is
how you may recognize the Spirit of God: every spirit which
acknowledges that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God.
Therefore we should pray for all to hear and should acknowledge Jesus
Christ in our prayer. Christ says (John 15), The Holy Spirit will bear
witness to me, and you also are witnesses. All who are led by the Spirit of

God are children of God. For you are not meant to fall back into the
slavish spirit of fear, but have received a childlike spirit enabling us to cry,
'Abba, dear Father!' The same Spirit of God joins with our spirit to testify
that we are the children of God (Romans 8). If he does not testify in a man,
then that man is not a child of God but a child of the Babylonian harlot.
Every spirit that does not confess that Christ is come in the flesh is not
from God, but is the spirit of Antichrist. (I John 4)
To pray hidden away in secret means to deny Christ; to pray to God
aloud and publicly means to acknowledge him. The Father, who sees what
is in secret, will openly give you what you deserve. (Matthew 6) Be on
your guard against these dogs, these wicked workmen, these mutilators,
for we are just like the dogs who grudge the cows their grass if we are not
ready to share our prayers with our neighbor. If I had cherished sin in my
heart, the Lord would not have listened. (Psalm 66) Only a lazy, deceitful
servant buries his talent in the earth and hides his light under a bushel.
Such people are wicked workmen who beat their fellows, who eat and
drink with the drunken, and behave just like the world does. They despise
the prophets' words, darken the spirit, which means the witness of Jesus,
and do not avoid appearing evil. They pray only to be seen by men's eyes,
for nothing reaches their neighbors' ears; no one knows whom you pray to,
and such prayer is without fruit. No, let us speak the truth in love.

(Mathies Hofer here quoted Ephesians 4:15-16 and Colossians 2 in
full.)
Beloved brothers, do not let your goal be shifted by the Antichrist, for
those who pray in secret do not accept the head by which the whole body is
bonded and knit together, each part helping the other. They hold to their
own possessions: they keep their prayers to themselves and refuse to help
their neighbors in either practical or spiritual ways. There is no fellowship
of the Spirit, no encouragement or comforting love; they are not of one
mind; each seeks his own interests in carnal and spiritual matters and not
the interests of others. (Philippians 2)

The early church in Jerusalem should be a shining light to us here:
although there were 120 of them (as we are told in Acts 1:15), they and the
eleven apostles all remained together in one room. With one consent they
devoted themselves to prayer together, and with them were a group of
women, including Mary, the mother of Jesus, as well as his brothers. One
helped and encouraged the other. Paul represents exactly the same: I desire
that in every place the men should pray, lifting holy hands without anger
or resentment,' and women, too, in the same manner. But in church
meetings women should not be allowed to speak; they should be
submissive. (1 Corinthians 14)
Dear brothers, do not judge hastily without a thorough examination of
the subject. As a light and example for you, I point to Christ and the
twelve apostles who shared a common life. When Christ rose from the
dead, he appeared to them as they were gathered with the doors locked. In
particular, he is an example to us when he led them out to the Mount of
Olives and told them to watch and pray together. He took James and his
brother John and Peter with him to be his witnesses. Christ then went a
stone's throw from them. All this is written to teach us the order we should
follow in the church. As shepherd, Christ himself was the night watchman
for them. He told the three disciples to watch and pray with him. The other
disciples also stayed together. But Christ came a first and a second time to
the three, not to them all. This is the reason for the church practice that the
night watchman calls three brothers who then call all those living together
in one room. In each room, whether occupied by single people or a
married couple, all who have been baptized and therefore have put on
Christ, should be of one mind and observe the same rule. To argue that
Christ prayed alone is self-will and therefore cannot be accepted. He did
not take on himself the honor of being High Priest, but was consecrated by
the Father and sent into the world for this purpose.
Do not presume to say, Let us build a tabernacle for each person. Did
not Peter speak in this way on the mountain, Let us make three tabernacles
here, one for you, one for Moses, but did he not know what he was saying?
(Matthew 17)

Is it not true that Roman Catholic priests, who set themselves up in
place of Christ, have their own private rooms to live in, and pray by
themselves? And the common people do the same. They all have private
property. The abominations of the west shall not be established in the east.
(In the margin, Mathies Hofer wrote another three lines.)
When the sisters say, We want to pray together, and at the same time
keep their stealthily concealed bread, meaning prayer, then they are
damned out of their own mouths and go limping with two different
opinions. If the Lord is God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him. Woe
to the sinner that follows two paths.
I know nothing. I stand completely alone. I only hope Martin will
write to you himself. I do not even know if they will once wish to see me
or speak with me.
Beloved brothers, I hope that when you admonish them they will
prove readier to obey you. You will be like the wise virgins who said to the
foolish, Go and buy for yourselves with your money. Do not keep it hidden
in a cloth. I am waiting in great longing for a cheering, positive reply from
you. It will rejoice my heart. I commend you to God, to his word of grace,
for he is greater, etc.
Mathies Hofer
***************

1768 Martin Glanzer letter to the church community
Brother Martin Glanzer also wrote to the church community about
this question. I wish to quote his letter as well.

Hermannstadt, May 24, 1768

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, my dear brothers
Hans, Joseph, and Andreas, and with the whole church. We cannot neglect
writing something to you, just as we never fail to remember you in our
prayers.
O you faithful, chosen, and consecrated children of the living God,
my beloved brothers and sisters, fellow members of the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ! We cannot thank God enough when we think what good and
wonderful things he has done for us all. We have received news that God
has helped the church community to flee unharmed, just as when he
accompanied the children of Israel on their flight from Egypt, parting the
Red Sea, leading them safely through. The Almighty still helps his people
as he did then. So we should never cease to praise and thank him with one
accord, and may God the Lord strengthen us in his truth until the end.
O most beloved brothers and sisters, how dear you are to the heart of
God our Father in heaven, because you love him and keep his
commandments and are eager to do his holy will! We want to let you know
what is happening to us.
Praise God we are all well, and we cannot praise him enough for
making us worthy to suffer shame and persecution for his holy name's
sake. As David says in Psalm 118:18, The Lord chastens me severely, but
he does not give me over to death. The Lord indeed gives us the bread of
fear and the water of affliction, and Baruch says, My tender children must
travel rough roads; they will be carried off by the enemy like a scattered
flock. Take heart, my children, and cry to the Lord, for he who lets you be
carried off will not forget you. He who brings this punishment upon us
will come again to help us and will bring us his eternal joy and bliss.
(Baruch 4)
We must tell you that four weeks before Christmas we were brought
in bonds to Hermannstadt by the clerk of the court and six guards with
weapons in hand.
They have imprisoned us in the town hall. We have never had a
hearing - neither from the worldly authorities nor the priests - nor has
anyone inquired whether we have anything to live on. But praise and

thanks to God, we have not gone without food, because our sisters in the
penitentiary are very loving and faithful in sharing with us each day. And
so, my dear brothers and sisters, you do not need to worry or grieve over
us. We have enough to live on, praise God!
We also need to report that we are in great disunity with brother
Mathies on the subject of prayer. When we were transferred to
Hermannstadt he sent us two letters, saying we should pray zealously
together, otherwise he cannot accept us. And if our enemies were to bring
us into a Roman Catholic church, we must not pray silently, but must pray
aloud. To this we replied, We have no intention of praying either silently
or aloud in an idolatrous temple. We do not want to act like idolaters, any
more than the three men did whose story is in Daniel 3.
Then he began again, as if it were a really evil thing for someone to
pray in secret. We refused to agree with him, for the Lord himself went
apart when he prayed, as John also taught his disciples. Mathies
immediately declared that anyone who prays in private is a dumb dog, a
mute idol, and like a dog that grudges hay to the cow, although he does not
eat it himself. He added that if the letters were too sharp for us, we should
send them back to him. Then I said that we did not want to quarrel over
prayers that are offered in a way which the whole church accepts as good.
If it is called idolatry for someone with a pure, devout heart to pray in
secret, I say No.
The sisters in the penitentiary tell me that Mathies talks as if they
never prayed together before. But they prayed together according to the
order in the church community, except that it was only Christina who led
the prayer and read. Now they take turns and pray together by night and
day. This does not satisfy Mathies, however. He tells people that if we will
not do as he wants, he will not come to peace with us. He says we should
reject the old ways and recognize that it was wrong to pray in private. And
no one should read by himself, for these practices are the greatest
abomination in the world: they are offerings to idols and mean that we are
worshipping idols and are making ourselves detestable in God's sight. We
cannot accept as true that God does not listen to silent prayer. Our God is
not like the god of the priests of Baal, of whom Elijah said, Call him

louder, for he is a god; it may be that he is deep in thought or occupied
elsewhere. We say with David, You know when I sit down
and when I rise up; you discern my thoughts from afar. (Psalm 139) I
will praise and thank the Lord with my whole heart whether I am alone by
myself or with the faithful or in the whole community of God. (Psalm 111)
If we think of Tobit and Sarah, did they not grieve alone, calling to
God, and did not God hear them? (Tobit 3) As David says, The sacrifice
acceptable to God is a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God,
you will not despise. (Psalm 51) Baruch teaches, When you see the people
in front of you and behind you worshiping idols, say in your hearts, 'It is
you, O Lord, we must worship.' The Lord tells us in the Gospels, When
you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who
is there in the secret place, and your Father who sees what is secret will
reward you openly. (Matthew 6) We believe that those who pray aloud in
the streets to be heard by men are hypocrites, but Mathies says they are
right to shout. He assumes we are calling him a hypocrite and insists that
the hypocrites are those who pray in secret.
Christina says, We can put no faith in his words, just as it was earlier,
when he spoke about embracing. Elisabeth says, We know very well we are
despised, and everything we say is ignored, but we want to be low and
humble. The Lord tells us, 'I will look on those who are downtrodden and
broken in spirit and who tremble at my Word. (Isaiah 66)
Hannah was a woman in deep distress, and she prayed in her heart.
Her lips were moving but she made no sound. (I Samuel 1) Eli thought that
she was drunk. But Hannah told him, No, my Lord, I am a deeply unhappy
woman. James says, Is anyone among you suffering? He should pray. Is
anyone happy? He should sing psalms. (James 5) When Peter brought
Tabitha back to life, did he not send everyone outside and call them back
to present her to them healed and well? (Acts 9) We do not know how to
pray as we ought, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with sighs too
deep for words. And he who searches the hearts of men knows what the
Spirit means, because the Spirit pleads for God's people in God's own way.
(Romans 8)

So, my dear brothers, consider how you are to judge and settle this
matter so that we find peace and unity and the church of God is gathered
and increased, not scattered. We look forward to a clear answer from you
at the earliest possible date. How much we would like to talk with you!
But the great danger and distance make this impossible. Notices were
already posted around the town last winter, asking information about the
two brothers Joseph Kuhr and Johannes Stahl. So, my dear brothers and
sisters, pray for us as we pray for you, as is right, that the Lord may
strengthen and uphold us to the end. Amen.
Barbara sends greetings to her husband and mother. Maria sends
greetings to her daughter and her son, Andreas Glanzer. The sisters in the
penitentiary and town hall greet each of you by name a hundred thousand
times and give you the kiss of love.
I, MARTIN, and Christian greet every single one of you with the kiss
of our Lord Jesus Christ. We greet you a hundred thousand times from the
bottom of our hearts. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit. Amen.
***************

1773 Many troubled by Mathies Hofer's letter
When the two letters to our church community arrived and were read
out in Wallachia, there were various talks about what brother Martin had
written. None of us had anything to say against it, for he expressed the
views of almost the whole brotherhood. But many were troubled by the
innovations suggested in Mathies' letter, for they found them strange and
questionable. Some said he was trying to introduce a new doctrine.
Everyone thought that what he said about love and strengthening each
other in faith was right, and that praying together was good and helpful,
but scarcely anybody could agree with him that it was loathsome and
detestable to pray quietly by oneself.

Brother Hans Kleinsasser, it is true, said that he could find some
understanding for it, although it spoke of high and divine mysteries. He
was not disturbed by the letter because Mathies emphasized so strongly
that the highest commandment is love. But Hans Kleinsasser was too weak
to bring the brotherhood to his way of thinking. He therefore wrote back to
Mathies in Hermannstadt asking him to explain and interpret his letter so
that simple people could understand it, for many brothers and sisters were
put off by the difficult words and hard expressions. Hans told Mathies of
some of the things they had said.
In reply Mathies wrote another letter to our brotherhood in Wallachia
and explained his mistaken ideas at still greater length. This letter,
however, was just as hard to follow as the first, for all he did was quote
numerous scriptural passages which were totally unrelated to the subject.
The Christian reader has had a sufficient example in the letter given
above. The entire Scriptures had to be wrenched and twisted to fit Mathies'
own ideas. But brother Hans Kleinsasser gained more people to support
him and to side with him and Mathies, in particular Andrea Wurz, who
was steward at the time, Hans' own two brother and still others.
When the letter had been read out and each brother was expressing
what he felt about it, Andreas declared, I believe this letter has the right
basis, the basis on which I will be judged on the Last Day. If anyone thinks
it is wrong, he shall be no brother of mine. With this, Andreas, brother
Hans, and several others left the meeting room. At first it looked as if they
would be the only ones with this conviction. Then a change came (before
anyone realized what was happening), for brother Hans and his supporters
took each of the others aside and talked to them individually until little by
little they won them over. No one was left except Joseph Kuhr, Paul and
Veit Glanzer and their families, and the Stahl family, which was still at
Tschoregirle because Johannes was continuing to work at his trade.
These four brothers firmly maintained that no new teachings should
be introduced. We should keep to the practices of our dear forefathers;
God granted enough enlightenment to those earlier brothers who gave their
lives for their beliefs. No weight was given to this at the time, and brother
Andreas Wurz even said that the matter was less clearly revealed to the

brothers of former days. Brother Joseph Kuhr, and those who believed as
he did, saw that they would not be able to live at Presetschain unless they
gave in. So Joseph went with Paul Glanzer to the like-minded Johannes
Stahl at Tschoregirle to look around for somewhere else to settle.
When brother Hans realized how much in earnest they were - they
would rather leave the community than accept Mathies' ideas - he went
himself to brother Joseph and Paul at Tschoregirle to persuade them to
remain at Presetschain. The two brothers finally agreed on condition that
the letter was not accepted but was discarded. Brother Hans had to promise
them this. So they returned to Presetschain and were reunited. Brother
Joseph and Paul and those with them agreed to praying together, but no
one was to press others to believe or declare that silent, personal prayer is
idolatry or devil worship. The other group yielded on this point and no
longer tried to insist on it, even though the letter had definitely used such
expressions. So this quarrel was settled and put aside until a later date. We
will soon hear more of it.
***************

1773 Strange ideas about eating
Besides this, Mathies fell into another misconception. about eating.
He brooded and speculated on Bible passages until he asserted that no food
or drink should be taken between early morning and midday. And once a
person had eaten and drunk at midday, he should eat and drink nothing
more before supper time. Mathies declared this would be a sin. He began
to practice his idea so strictly that even when he became faint and weak on
the journey he refused to take anything to strengthen himself. No matter
how much he needed it, he would not let a morsel of bread or a sip of wine
or water pass his lips before the appointed hour.
He wanted the whole community to adopt this false practice, but it
was rejected with one voice by the brothers, who proved on the basis of

Holy Scripture that he was wrong. He therefore gave it up. I do not know
his reasons for the idea and so cannot explain them.
Some years later, he left the community and went to Prussia, as will
be recorded further on. There he began to hold strictly to this idea again.
Even out in the fields, harvesting or doing other work in the hot summer
weather, he made a great thing of not drinking any water between times, so
that many could not understand how he could hold out in the heat.
When this Mathies, brother Martin Glanzer, and others arrived in
Russia in 1773, the struggle about prayer broke out anew. During the
whole journey, and long before in Hermannstadt, Mathies had not been in
unity with the others. Each side said they would do whatever the
brotherhood would represent. Brother Martin won over his own brothers
and several more to his side; they wanted to keep to the agreement the had
reached in Wallachia. Brother Hans Kleinsasser, the church Elder, some of
his brothers, and a number of others were on Mathies' side.
There was open division and argument between us, each side
defending its opinion with the Holy Scriptures. Mathies declared in front
of the whole church that if a man did not present his offering in front of
the tabernacle of witness but offered it outside the camp, then his offering
was not to God but to demons. In short he presented his view very
powerfully, expressing the same ideas as in his letter quoted above.
Although passages from both the Old and New Testament were pointed out
to him in support of the other side, they carried no weight for him. These
passages were mostly included in Martin Glanzer's letter as quoted above,
in particular Psalm 111, and passages about Christ and Peter praying
alone, about Hannah, Daniel, Elijah, Elisha, and others as well. Mathies
explained them all away and had answers for everything.
***************

1773 Brotherhood brought into confusion

The whole brotherhood was brought into confusion. Many Godfearing people were deeply disturbed and many sighed in grief before God.
Many did not know which side they should take. They felt unable to judge
Martin Glanzer as wrong, but they could not disprove Mathies' ideas, for
he supported them so strongly from the Holy Scriptures. Yet however
much he insisted, hardly anyone could understand why silent prayer
should be an abomination.
Brother Joseph Kuhr had at other times been a powerful defender of
the truth. Neither Jesuits nor any other priests could get the better of him
in a dispute, as shown earlier in this book. But he was unable to convince
Mathies, and he, like all the others, became completely confused on this
issue. He gave the advice that the quarrel should be decided by lot to see
which party was right or wrong. Brother Hans agreed to the suggestion.
Mathies said, I am absolutely sure of what I represent. I do not need any
casting of lots. But for the sake of the weak who cannot understand the
question, I will agree to this taking place.
Brother Martin Glanzer and his supporters also said that for their part
they did not need to have lots cast, for they were going to hold to the same
beliefs as when they had given themselves to God through the covenant of
Christian baptism. They believed it to be sufficient basis and the true way
to eternal salvation. At the time of their baptism nothing had been said to
them about these new ideas. They refused to have anything to do with
casting lots, no matter how it turned out.
Decision by lot was represented by the elders and the most highly
regarded brothers: by brother Joseph Kuhr, Hans Kleinsasser, Mathies
Kleinsasser, and Joseph Kleinsasser, who was steward at the time. These
were supported by several more, including Johannes Hofer, Elias Wipf,
and Lorenz Tschetter - all witness brothers. The other young brothers and
the sisters hardly knew what they should do. They were troubled and
downhearted because it was plain that the question would be difficult to
settle and would very likely lead to a division. Most of them felt that
casting lots was not necessary since we had all testified in the covenant of
baptism that we had understood enough of God's Word to acknowledge it
as the pure truth and the way to eternal life. Moreover we had around us a

great cloud of witnesses who had fought with all their hearts for this faith
and remained true until death. What need did we have for anything else? If
we could only follow after them, walking faithfully in their footsteps,
there would be no doubt of reaching eternal salvation.
Already in Transylvania, however, Mathies Hofer had been highly
regarded, and little had been done without his advice; now that he was
with the community, his proposals appeared to be spiritual concerns, for he
lived a good, devout life and went around speaking to one and the other in
a helpful way, encouraging them in faith.
Joseph Kuhr and Hans Kleinsasser, the two preachers or teachers, and
Hans' brothers, too, were much trusted by the church community. Many
people followed them because they felt them to be the most virtuous and
God-fearing.
These brothers did all they could to call first one and then another
aside for a talk about the question, until most were persuaded to agree to
deciding by lot. But some consented with great reluctance, feeling very
uneasy that people who were certain in their hearts about the true way of
salvation, should behave as if they were in doubt and ask the Lord for
direction by casting lots. They were afraid that asking such a question
would be putting God to the test and would provoke him to anger. These
fears were quieted, however, because it would not be done out of curiosity,
nor from greed for wrongful gain, as with Balaam. It would be done out of
our great need to find peace. So there was much hope that the Lord would
make it serve for the best, would show us his truth, and would reveal his
divine will to us in this way as he had done twice before.
Brother Martin, the Glanzer brothers, and some others held firmly to
their opinion and refused to agree to casting lots. Those on the other side,
however, determined to go on with their plan. The next day the brothers
and sisters who had agreed to decide by lot met together in the weavers'
room, which is now the cabinetmakers' workshop. Martin Glanzer and his
supporters gathered in the room which was generally used for preaching
and church meetings (because at that time we did not have a separate
meetinghouse).

There was still a great deal of discussion before the lots were cast. It
was not undertaken freely and confidently, but with wavering, resistance,
and unbelief. Some of the younger brothers were thoroughly distressed and
confused and would have liked to leave the meeting, but they lacked the
courage. When Mathies noticed this, he said, For my part I have no need to
cast lots. I am certain the Lord will affirm my belief. However, if the Lord
shows that everyone can do as he likes and pray when he wants to, I will
leave it at that. The church's Confession of Faith was brought in and dear
brother Peter Ridemann's words on prayer were considered, but they
seemed to have little bearing on the question.
Yet those leading the meeting said there was nothing to prevent them
going forward. After a great deal of talk, they at last came to common
prayer, calling on God to reveal his divine will. After the prayer, they cast
lots. But God answered in the same manner as he had been asked, for the
lot fell in Mathies' favor, signifying that he was right. When this was
disclosed, nearly everyone was unhappy about it. Heads sank, for people
had not expected this outcome. They had hoped that Mathies would be
proved wrong, so that the argument would come to an end once and for all.
Many now deeply regretted agreeing to the method, but since they had
previously consented they could not now withdraw. They had to accept the
decision.
Brother Joseph Kuhr went to the brothers in the other room and asked
if they would consent to what the Lord had shown us. They said, No.
As a result, they were given a separate table at mealtimes and the
bond of peace was severed. They were deeply unhappy at being cut off
from the church for such a reason, for they would gladly have remained
and been at peace if such innovations had not been introduced. After
consulting together, they sent two of their number to the count's master
builder, who was responsible for us at the time. They asked him about
another place to live, since they were no longer united with the others. The
master builder told them he would have to report the matter to the count,
but he wondered if they might not become reconciled; it would make a

very poor impression on the count if they were so changeable. He
therefore advised them to let the matter rest for the time being.
Later on, if they had still not reached agreement, he would write to
the count.
So the move was put off for a time, and meanwhile the brothers had
further talks with one another to find the best solution to the problem, for
both sides were eager for them all to remain together.
***************

1773 Subject carefully searched through forefather's
writings
And God, our loving heavenly Father, who had led us together, now
mercifully protected us so that no separation came about.
We searched carefully through our forefathers' writings. The
chronicle of our church was especially helpful to us. We had not had it
previously, for it was brought to us by the brothers and sisters who had
been imprisoned at Hermannstadt. This and other books from Alwinz
came into their hands by a special intervention of God.
There was a widow, a fellow countrywoman from Carinthia, named
Schneeweiss. She had a daughter who married Heinrich Roth, the son of
Märtl Roth, the unfaithful Elder and servant of the Word from the
community at Alwinz. When Märtl Roth died, he left behind him a chest
of old books. His son became head of the family and inherited the books.
Widow Schneeweiss brought some of them to Hermannstadt and sold them
to the brothers in the town hall.
The brothers from Martin's group drew attention especially to the
explanation of Christ's words, When you pray, go into your room. The
commentary on this chapter went very fully into the subject of prayer,
saying it is a holy encounter with God in which a man brings his heart's

concerns, needs, and longings before God, and this is best done in a place
by oneself. The examples were then given of Samuel's mother, Hannah,
and of the prophet Elisha and how he raised the Shunammite woman's son
from the dead. A second passage from the chronicle was also read. It
recounted that in the year 1593, a terrible war broke out with the Turks.
That was a time of great tribulation. Therefore the elders of the
church exhorted us in this time of need to persevere in prayer more
fervently than ever. They agreed that whenever the servants of the Word
could arrange it, any time of day or night, we should unite in prayer,
humbly asking God to remember us and help us. ... The brothers and
sisters were ... to look to God ... in prayer, not only together in the
meeting, but whenever they could, individually.
These words were emphasized, for it was clear from both passages
that in earlier years silent personal prayer had been practiced as well as
communal prayer. The question was raised whether this practice had been
mistaken and wrong on the part of the church at that time. No one dared
assert such a thing. Even Hans Kleinsasser lacked the courage.
***************

1773 The long disputes were settled
Consequently, an agreement was reached similar to the one made in
Wallachia: the brothers and sisters consented to pray together but were not
to be prevented from praying alone and in secret, for such prayer was now
to be accepted.
Because of the way they had come to casting lots (which we have
already described), one can understand that no one kept strictly to what
had been shown. We prayed together and we also prayed alone if we were
prevented from praying with others. But it was not permitted for someone
to go aside purposely to pray alone, and the common prayer was preferred
to private prayer. Mathies was at last satisfied by this.

Easter time came. The elders decided to hold the Lord's Supper and
the church was instructed to prepare for it. Then brother Martin Glanzer,
his brothers, and the others with him all united fully with the church. The
gave all their temporal goods - the inherited property which the empress
had ordered the authorities in Hermannstadt to let the brothers bring with
them. The brotherhood would not unite with them until this was done.
Afterward, they held the Lord's Supper together, and the ugly quarreling
was brought to a peaceful end.
***************

1773 Why quarrels must be recounted
With the help of the money handed in by the brothers, we were able
to repay Count Rumiantsev all that he had advanced to us for the journey
and during the time afterwards when we were very poor.
I would much rather have passed over these quarrels in silence. I have
found it hard and distressing enough to revive for posterity the memories
of these old faults and failures in the church for perhaps as people died
these things might have been forgotten. But my heart and conscience
compelled me to write against my will, for the following reasons:
First, in order to present the whole truth about our history and keep
back nothing important that took place, both praiseworthy and
unpraiseworthy acts are recorded, just as in Bible stories about the Godfearing people of old - patriarchs, kings, and prophets.
Second, to serve as a warning, for while quarrels and divisions arise
all too often among believers, no one should reject community and the
sharing of a common life because of faults and weaknesses. No one should
copy the opponents of community and true surrender, the self-seekers who
exaggerate such things and say that community and a common life only
multiply reasons for quarreling and division. We must not let such
difficulties frighten us away from the Lord's work. We need only look
back to earlier times to see that they were never free of similar weeds

which the enemy tried to sow among the wheat. What confusion and
divisions there were in the church in Jakob Hutter's day! But brothers and
sisters did not give up because of them. They put things right and reunited.
Third, to warn against any of us presuming to introduce a new
practice he has invented himself and thereby alter, disturb, and displace
the old, well-proved order of the church. This applies particularly to
articles of faith and interpretations of Scripture.
No one should have too great a confidence in himself and rely on his
own understanding and insight. Such fabricators and hair-splitters, who try
to know and understand everything better than anyone else, have never at
any time led to anything good. This can be seen clearly enough from our
experience with Mathies and others. For however good his intentions may
have been, he went too far and erred to the right.
***************

1773 Mathies Hofer objected to singing while at work
After this error, he very soon had another scruple. In autumn 1773, he
started thinking it was wrong for people to sing at their work. It was his
belief that if someone wanted to sing, he should stop working until he had
finished his song. But no one was able to agree with him on this point. No
one could feel it was wrong to be moved to sing psalms or songs of praise
to the Lord in all zeal and reverence during work. So no one paid any
attention to Mathies' words, and the sisters went on singing at the spinning
as they had always done. He pretended not to hear, just as he refused to
take off his hat. He thought he would force his ideas through. When no one
gave in to him, he left the community and went away. He had gone no
further than Banernitz, however, when he was detained and sent back to
Vishenka. The officials brought him to our community. A few days later he
went away again and stayed in the wood, but he came back of himself and
confessed he was in the wrong and had pressed his own view too much. He
told us that while in the wood he had prayed earnestly to God to show him

plainly if he were mistaken. Then God put into his mind the beginning of
Psalm 34 where David says, I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise
shall continually be in my mouth. The afflicted shall hear it and be glad.
Then the light dawned. Now he, too, sang at his work.
Up to this time he had not received Christian baptism. He spoke to
the brothers and made his request. Accordingly he was baptized by brother
Hans Kleinsasser and accepted into the Church on October 27, 1773.
Shortly afterward, he married sister Rosina Bichler. At peace with
everyone, he proved himself in so many ways and won such trust that in
1778, with brother. Joseph Müller, he was made a witness brother. His
further history will be told later.
***************

1773 Community's outward circumstances improved
As the years went by, and in this year, too, the community's outward
circumstances were improving. The weaving had gone well from the very
first year. In 1773 the pottery, was brought into good working order. There
had been many delays. The first kiln was built on the site of our present
kitchen, and the workshop was planned to come there, too. But the
brothers were unable to produce glazed earthenware and they began to
think of abandoning the attempt. Then another kiln with a workshop beside
it was built where the bakery now stands. For a long time this did not work
properly either. Brother Johannes Stahl experimented and tried every
possible method until he had it in running order. It cost the community
quite an outlay before the pottery produced as it should. A smithy was set
up in the community, and we also began to distill a little spirits.
In 1776, with the count's permission, we built the water mill on piles,
and eleven years later, in 1787, we built a windmill as well. The
community room where the elders met and the larder or room for cold
storage were also built in 1776.

In 1778, we built the schoolhouse for the older and younger children's
groups, and in the following year we planned to have a meetinghouse. We
actually built it in 1779, but it has now been made into rooms for the
mothers and babies.
God blessed us in other ways, too, in those years, for the fields
yielded good crops. Compared to our previous poverty, the community had
a better standard of living. May God be praised and thanked forevermore
for his goodness!
***************

1779 Hans Kleinsasser passed away/Joseph Kuhr made Elder
On October 16, 1779, the Elder of the whole church, dear brother
Hans Kleinsasser, fell asleep in the Lord with a peaceful heart at Vishenka
in the Ukraine. He was fifty-three years old. For eighteen years he had led
and cared for the church to the best of his ability. Though he was weak in
some ways, God had worked through him to gather and build up the church
and bring it from its first beginnings to the point I have described. In other
ways he was a capable man, gifted with wisdom and understanding from
God and well able to take matters in hand. *
After his burial on October 17, the elder brothers held a meeting and
Joseph Kuhr was entrusted with the heavy responsibility of caring for all
the needs of the church community and shepherding the people with sound
teaching. We continued for a week praying earnestly to God that he might
give us a true servant of the Word and show us through an election the
brother he had appointed.
When the election was made and all had spoken, Joseph Müller was
the one chosen. In the church meeting on October 31, he was appointed for
a time of testing.
On. March 22, 1780, at Vishenka in the Ukraine, brother Joseph
Müller was confirmed as servant of the Word through laying on of hands

by the elders.
***************

1780 Mathies Hofer's disagreement over prayers/excluded
About this time, several brothers began to speak against using the
Book of Psalms as prayers in church meetings. All brothers in the church
were called together and each said what he believed right on the question.
Our forefathers' writings were searched to discover how meetings were
held in the church in Moravia. The brothers found that whenever possible
there had been a meeting for common prayer once a day. It became clear to
most of them that we should do everything possible in the same manner as
the earlier brothers had done. So by common consent the psalms from the
Bible were no longer read as prayers in church meetings. The morning
meeting also came to an end. It was decided there should be only one
meeting a day with a preface followed by common prayer, a reading, and
some singing.
Not everyone was happy about these arrangements. Mathies Hofer in
particular was strongly against them. He and others objected that we could
never be too zealous or spend too much effort in prayer and praise to God,
for God the Lord is worthy of far greater honor and praise. But they had to
give way and do what most people advocated.
Besides this change, brother Joseph Kuhr re-introduced the silent
thanksgiving at the Lord's Supper that had been used in earlier times. The
custom had been altered by brother Hans Kleinsasser, who said the prayer
aloud for the whole congregation - another cause of wrangling and
division during the previous unrest, since the brothers from Stein and
others with them were strongly opposed to introducing different ways and
giving up the old order for holding meetings. At that time, however, their
views were not accepted because common prayer was felt to be better than
quiet personal prayer, which was the deciding factor in this case, too.

Now the Lord's Supper was held, and brother Joseph Kuhr did not
lead the prayer aloud, but used the silent thanksgiving described in the old
writings. Brother Mathies Hofer could not endure it. He left the
meetinghouse and did not take part in the Lord's Supper. When he was
admonished, the struggle with him began over again. He refused
correction and held on to his own opinion. Again he used very strong
terms as if we were burying our talent, putting our light under the bench,
and other unjustified expressions.
When the brotherhood withstood him and would not accept his ideas,
he ran away again and wandered around in the woods for days until he was
faint with hunger. A few brothers went in pity and compassion to look for
him, meaning to give him burial if he had died. They found him still alive,
but had the greatest difficulty in persuading him to come home with them.
In the end he said he would be content if he might stay as a guest and
stranger among them, having food and lodging from the community while
left in peace to hold his own views.
The brothers were called to a meeting where his request was put to
them. They agreed on condition that he apologized for his strong
expressions. He was ready to take back his words and admitted he had
spoken too loudly and roughly, not with love and kindness as he should
have done. At the same time he defended his views and what he had
actually represented. As the brothers could not accept his statement, it was
again asked what should be done with him. Again each brother voiced his
opinion.
Some felt great pity and sympathy for Mathies and said that if none
of the brothers objected, they, for their part, would let him live in the
community. But most said that he should be put out of the church, for he
was the root of much evil and damage in the community, a self-willed man
who brought disturbance and confusion. If he clung to his own ideas and
refused to be corrected, we should not allow him to remain, following the
example of the church of God in Moravia when dealing with such people.
This was the answer made to him.
Mathies was given a few rubles to help him on his journey, and he set
out. Before he had gone many miles he was arrested and taken to prison in

Glukhov. Since he was unable to speak Russian, he was interrogated by a
German to discover, who he was and where he was going. When asked
whether he belonged to the colony at Vishenka, Mathies denied it. *
He was asked where he wanted to go. He said he was looking for his
brothers. When questioned further about what brothers he meant, he
replied that the Quakers were his brothers. Mathies was then given a man
to escort him from one town to the next until he was out of the country. In
this way he came to Elbing in Prussia. There he was given hospitality in
Ellerwald by Gerhard Wiebe, a minister and elder of the Mennonite
church. Mathies explained his situation to him. This chain of events
brought us in contact with the Mennonites in Prussia, for previously they
had known nothing about us, and we nothing about them. **
***************

1781 Gerhard Wiebe's letter to the Community
In the following year, 1781, Gerhard Wiebe wrote a letter to the
church in Russia. It is included here to clarify the situation.

Ellerwald near Elbing, March 5, 1781
My dear brother Joseph Kuhr, whom my soul loves! I wish you and
the church in your house great grace and peace from God the Father and
Jesus our Savior, together with the comfort of the Holy Spirit, so that we
may be united more fully in faith and love and more closely with Jesus,
our true and loving Emanuel, and so become one in spirit. Amen.
I took the liberty of mailing a short letter to you on December 11 of
last year. As I have not received a reply, I presume that the letter did not
reach you. I will repeat what I then wrote. Some years ago, a Bohemian
brother, a harnessmaker named Jan Schlerk, told us the tragic news that
the community of brothers in Upper Hungary had been wiped out by

severe persecution and that the community in Transylvania had been
banished. But we were unable to discover where you were now living.
On December 5, 1780, however, a man from your community arrived
here, very poor but in good health. His name is Mathies Hofer. I never took
a more surprising guest into our home than this one! When I asked him
why he had made such a long journey, he replied that he had been unable
to find agreement with the brothers about public prayer at the Lord's
Supper or breaking of bread, and they would not allow him to stay. His
conscience had driven him to leave the church and his wife, and he was
now looking for a congregation that agreed with his views and lived in
community of goods. I advised him against going farther, as I do not
believe he will find what he seeks. I am acquainted with the congregations
in Germany and Holland, for I correspond with them, and I do not know of
any that live in community of goods. So he is still with me, and I do not
want to let him go farther, but advise him to return to you as soon as I
have received your answer.
Well, dear brother, that is the reason for my letter: first, to get to
know you and, as we cannot meet and talk face to face, to write from time
to time so that we may cheer and encourage one another in the Lord as
fellow pilgrims on a hard and wearisome road. And may God grant us his
help until through grace we are brought where we may see one another in
eternal love, and may rejoice and delight in one another before the throne
of the Lamb. Amen.
Second, I would like to be a humble mediator between this exile and
your dear congregation. So I am making a heartfelt appeal to you and the
community on this brother's behalf. Forgive the poor man for Jesus' sake if
he has gone against your convictions at
any point. One can hope he did not do it out of malice, but either out
of weakness or because his conscience compelled him. Forgive his fault if,
as I gather from what he says, it is a matter of different opinions and does
not involve opposition to sound doctrine.
What is best to do in this case? I think it best to bear with one another
in love. He still seems to love the community and does not want to be

separated from it. The Apostle Paul teaches us such forbearance. When he
circumcised Timothy for the sake of the Jews, he gave us an example of
how we should reach out to the weak. I hope, dear brother, that his Spirit
will teach you that love is greater than all else, also greater than all
knowledge.
I beg you to forgive me for my presumption. I am sure you will do so.
I will look forward to receiving a charitable answer. My humble words are
written with only the kindest intentions, and I am confident that you will
let them weigh with you a little and will ask this poor brother to return.
When this happens, I intend, God willing, to send with him a few writings
of service in building up God's Kingdom. I believe this man came to us by
God's especial leading to help us to get to know each other as we sojourn
here. If my letter reaches you and I receive an answer, we will open our
hearts more deeply to each other.
In closing, I commend you to God's protection and greet you and the
church with the peace that Christ bought so dearly for us. Although we
have never met, we are united in love, and I remain your brother and
unworthy fellow servant of the Gospel of Christ.
Gerhard Wiebe
***************

1786 Mathies passed away/worship changed
His letter was answered by the elders of the church, who explained
on the basis of Holy Scripture the good and sufficient reasons for Mathies'
expulsion from the church and why we could not reaccept him unless he
changed his convictions.
After this, letters were often exchanged with Gerhard Wiebe. When
we sent no invitation for Mathies to come back to us, he did not remain
with the Mennonite elder but left Ellerwald for Brenkenhoffswalde near
Driesen, another place where Mennonites had settled. There he stayed for

a time with an elder named Ernst Voth, then went on to Hamburg and
wanted to cross the ocean to America. Since he had no provision for his
journey and could not pay fifty imperial talers to go by ship, he made his
way to Holland. He reached the city of Groningen, but could go no further
because he did not know the language. So he turned back to Altona and
lived there for a time. In 1784, he returned to Brenkenhoffswalde, where
he fell asleep in the Lord in 1786. *
After brother Hans Kleinsasser had died and Mathies Hofer had left
the community, the order of worship they had introduced began little by
little to lapse and disappear. I DO NOT MEAN TO COMMEND THIS
NEGLECT, NOR AM I GLAD FOR IT. THE GATHERINGS FOR PRAYER
AND ESPECIALLY THE READING AT MIDDAY HELPED BUILD UP
THE YOUNG PEOPLE'S FAITH, AS PREVIOUSLY DESCRIBED, EACH
READ IN TURN AND SO EACH WAS INVOLVED, AND IT OFTEN LED
TO A TALK ABOUT THE MEANING OF A PASSAGE OF HOLY
SCRIPTURE. At that time each one took
pains to be able to read out the Scriptures fluently, and such a practice
could still be used with a good conscience today. Now each young brother
wants to have a good, well-bound Bible with big print, but many of them
(always excepting the zealous) know little of what is inside. Paul taught in
1 Thessalonians. 5:2, Prove all things, hold fast to that which is good. It
would have been possible to drop what was unnecessary and exaggerated
and to keep what was good. But each can judge the matter as he sees fit.
***************

1781 First mission journey from Vishenka
In 1780 news of great changes in the Holy Roman Empire began
reaching us through various people who came to Russia from Germany.
When the Empress Maria Theresa died, her son Joseph II was crowned
emperor. He promised freedom of faith for all religions, for previously the
Lutherans, too, had been oppressed in many districts. The new emperor

granted them freedom to build churches. He expelled the Jesuits from
every part of his empire and banned this and other religious orders. He
plundered the monasteries, using them for other purposes; he appropriated
the money and valuables he found in them, and did many similar things.
At about the same time, a secretary of Prince Gallizin, the Russian
ambassador, came from Vienna in Austria to visit Count Rumiantsev, the
czar's field marshal, and stayed for a time on his estate at Tschereschink
near Vishenka. The secretary, a nobleman named von Klupfeld, had with
him a servant called Anton Ruschek. They came to our place with other
officials, looking around to see how we had arranged and set up
everything, because the community with many people living together was
a real wonder to the district. When the count received visits from foreign
nobles and officials, he often brought them to our place and showed them
how we organized the school, the workshop, the kitchen, and everywhere
else. Anton Ruschek was extremely kind and helpful to us. He learned that
the group now gathered in Vishenka originally came from Carinthia,
Transylvania, and Hungary, and that we longed to hear how the relatives
left behind in these places were faring. He therefore offered to take a letter
to Germany for us, deliver it to the right address, and send an answer back.
This suggestion made us very happy. We wrote three letters, one to
Carinthia, one to Transylvania, and one to Hungary, and this kind-hearted
man took them with him to the correct places. In a short while we received
answers from Velké Leváre' in Hungary and from Carinthia. *
Since the situation in Germany proved to be as we had heard, God
filled many brothers with courage and great eagerness to send two of their
number into the countries we have mentioned to find out whether any
there had the zeal and longing to learn of God and his truth, to change their
lives, and to save their souls from eternal destruction. In addition, brother
Joseph Kuhr's three children were still in Transylvania and Johannes Stahl
had two brothers and other relatives in Hungary.
So we asked the count for a pass for the journey, and we a received
one.
Two brothers were then chosen for the task: brother Joseph Müller,
who was newly appointed as minister, and Paul Glanzer. They were to

travel through the three countries, visit those eager to listen, and if
possible bring some back to the church community. We prayed earnestly
for the travelers, and there were many tears and heartfelt farewells before
we took, leave of them.
They set off in the name of God, taking the route through Kiev, Brody
and Lemberg, then straight on to Velké Leváre where they began visiting
the brothers who had left the faith: As soon as they said who they were and
distributed letters from relatives, the people were very glad to see them.
They were amazed that the community still existed, since they had thought
it was completely wiped out. Before the brothers had been there long, the
Jesuit appeared to ask if they had a pass. When the showed it, he spoke to
them in quite an affable way. They stayed for two days and told the former
brothers and sisters all that had happened to the community in
Transylvania and Wallachia.
Continuing their journey to Vienna, they presented themselves to
Prince Gallizin, the Russian ambassador, who provided them with a pass
to travel in Carinthia. Here they were received with great joy, for several
people still remembered brother Paul Glanzer. Yet the brothers were not
able to do what they had hoped, for the truth and pure teaching of the
Gospel was unknown to these people, and they could not grasp it so
quickly. When they heard that among us only adults are baptized, not
children, they found it very strange, for the contemptuous term Anabaptist
is much hated even today, and ordinary people think of the Anabaptists as
the most blasphemous heretics who ever lived. As a result, even the
brothers' closest relatives shrank back from them. So they went back to
Vienna.
When they returned to the unfaithful brothers and sisters at Velké
Leváre, they wanted to stay with them for a few days, but the Jesuit came
immediately and ordered them off the property. Although they asked him
three times in the most friendly way if they might stay overnight, he cut
them short, saying that if they did not leave at once he would have them
taken in custody. The fact was that unrest and disturbance had arisen at
Sabatisch when the people heard through our letters that there was a
church community gathered in Russia, sharing all possessions in common

and granted freedom of religion. The Sabatisch brothers and sisters were
very eager for a visit from our two brothers, but their priest or Jesuit
discovered what was afoot. As he supervised and was in complete control
of the place, Paul Glanzer and Joseph Müller could not risk going there.
They left Velké Leváre for Pressburg.
Jakob Walter from Sabatisch, however, sent a present after them
consisting of a few books and two jackets, two pairs of pants, and two
pairs of shoes once worn by the Hutterian brothers. This was to show the
brotherhood and their children in Russia the sort of clothing our
forefathers had worn.
Brother Joseph Müller had mailed a letter from Vienna with a
detailed report to the community in Russia about all they had attempted to
do and what had come of it.
From Pressburg, the brothers made their way into Transylvania. They
first arrived at Szaszvaros, went on to Muhlbach and from there sent a
message to Alwinz. Although several people came out to see them, no one
wanted to return to the church community with them. All the zeal and
enthusiasm had died. From Mühlbach, the brothers traveled to
Hermannstadt and visited friends and relatives. They went to every place
where they thought or at least hoped they might find some response, but
they found none and achieved nothing. So they set out on their return to
Russia, reaching Vishenka on December 12, in good health and in peace
with the church.
In the same year, 1781, Andreas Gross came to the church community
with his wife, Christina, and his son. Christina and her son accepted the
truth and united with the church, but Andreas remained an unbeliever until
he died.
***************

1782 Second mission journey from Vishenka

In the spring of 1782, brother Joseph Kuhr, church Elder at that time,
and brother Elias Wipf were sent to Transylvania, for brother Joseph still
had three children in Alwinz whom he had been forced to leave behind for
the sake of his faith (as is recorded above for the year 1764). He longed to
save them and bring them to the church, if God willed this and made it
possible, as well as any others who were full of zeal and wanted to save
their souls from everlasting ruin. Earnest prayer was made for the
travelers and they took leave of the community, set out in the Lord's name,
and so came to Alwinz and Hermannstadt. They succeeded in bringing two
of Joseph's children, Andreas and Gretel, out of Alwinz. Michel Kuhr,
however, had been married a long time to a Hungarian wife and was
unable to tear himself away from his temporal possessions. He asked his
father to come for him the following year; in the meantime, he said, he
would sell this or that quietly. So he remained behind. Once he let the
moment of God's grace pass by him, he had lost it forever. He died only a
few years later, about 1786.
Brother Andreas Wurz's stepdaughter, Elisabeth Straus, was still in
Hermannstadt. Although she would gladly have returned with the brothers,
she was held back because of her unbelieving husband and the cross that
God had laid on her.
Brother Joseph comforted her and accepted her as a sister after she
showed that she repented with all her heart for her unfaithfulness.
Brother Joseph (Kuhr) and Elias (Wipf) together with Andreas (Kuhr)
and his sister arrived safely in the Vishenka community on June 30. They
were welcomed with great joy and thanksgiving to God.
While brother Joseph and Elias were in Transylvania, Jakob Walter at
Sabatisch wrote a letter to the brotherhood in Russia, reporting that the
visit of our two brothers had roused great interest and enthusiasm. Many
people in Sabatisch wanted to return to their old faith and begged the
brotherhood to help them in some way, if this were possible. I will now
quote Jakob Walter's letter:
***************

1782 Jakob Walter's letter to the Church
Sabatisch, June 22, 1782
Dear Joseph Kuhr,
We wish grace and peace from God to you and your brothers and
helpers in the service of the Word. This we wish the whole church in
Russia, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Beloved brothers in Jesus Christ, we feel urged to send you a few
lines to report that Heinrich Schmid, Jakob Miller, and I, Jakob Walter, all
three from Sabatisch, were in Vienna on June 22 in order to present an
appeal to the emperor. Our agent advised against it, however, and said we
should rather wait until our case comes up together with the Lutherans'. I
must tell you, dear brothers, that we at Sabatisch have made a statement to
both the religious and secular authorities that we are firmly resolved with
God's help to return to the faith we previously confessed.
Dear brothers, I must tell you that we received your letter around
May 22, and it gave us great joy. We gather that the two brothers sent out
by God have been brought safely back to the church. We cannot thank the
Almighty sufficiently for this.
My dear brothers, what an inexpressible joy it would be if such
heroes could come to help us in the battle we are now facing.
Dear brothers, as far as our elders are concerned, they have become
out-and-out children of Satan, intent on suppressing the truth in every
possible way. I cannot tell you much about the people at Velké Leváre, as
they are only waiting to see how we will fare.
My dearest Johannes Stahl, I must tell you that your cousin, Joseph
Stahl, has become utterly unfaithful and no longer has any thought of
rousing from his sleep of sin. Dear brother Joseph Kuhr, I have received
your encouraging letter and was heartily glad for it.

All you beloved brothers in Christ Jesus, I beg you for the mercy of
Christ to stand by us with help and advice in whatever way is possible, for
in Sabatisch there are thirty men determined to follow you with their
wives and children if we can only get out of the country. We have already
tried various means, but the best way is to trust in God with strong hope
that he, the Almighty, will be gracious to us and let us come to the right
decision. For we have consented to obey the emperor's wishes; if he
refuses to tolerate us at Sabatisch, we will go wherever he decides for us.
The agent we have employed believes that we will be sent to Transylvania
if we want to return to our former faith. God knows our situation. We beg
you not to forget us, but always to include us in your prayers. We greet you
all: Härich Schmid, Jakob Müller, Andreas Schmid, Jakob Schultz,
Abraham Baumgartner, Joseph Dangler, Paul Tschetter, and all the others.
Especial greetings from me, Jakob Walter, and from the two brothers who
were in Vienna with me. I commend us all to God's protection. I have
written this in great haste in Anton Ruschek's room. It is the fourth letter I
have written to you, but I have not received a reply to any of them.
Farewell,
Jakob Walter
***************

1782 Brothers not tolerated/many turned Catholic
Brother Joseph Müller answered Jakob's letter, telling him that no
one could be sent at the moment, for brother Joseph Kuhr was away on a
journey to Transylvania. As soon as he came back we would do whatever
was possible.
When the two brothers arrived home on June 30, the request from
Sabatisch was brought forward and carefully considered. The brothers
decided that such a heartfelt plea could not be ignored. It was our duty in
the sight of God to bring them help. We prayed earnestly to God that he
might grant his grace and blessing to this undertaking.

It was also recognized by the brothers at this meeting that it was
urgently necessary to elect another servant of the Word. We prayed for
this, too, begging and pleading to God.
After the prayer, the brothers were chosen. It was decided that brother
Müller and brother Christian Hofer should go to Sabatisch and help
wherever possible with advice, instruction, and encouragement.
Then a brother was chosen as servant of the Word: Johannes Waldner
received unanimous testimony from the assembled brothers. On August
16, he was appointed before the whole church for a time of testing.
The following year on April 2, 1783, he was confirmed in the service
of the Word through laying on of hands by the elders.
When the people at Sabatisch declared they wanted to return to their
old faith and then stopped attending church, this caused much anger and
uproar, for the godless crowd cannot bear a light to arise; they rush to the
spot at once and try to dampen and extinguish it. So at this point the
Roman Catholic priests incited the secular authorities to seize the
defectors' goods, and persons. The magistrates complied by immediately
arresting the most devout and highly-regarded brothers in the group:
Heinrich Schmid, Jakob Walter, Jakob Miller, Paul Tschetter, - Mathies
Dangler, and Johannes Koller.
These six men were bound fast and taken to Neutra, where they were
put in a horrible, stinking prison. The names of the rest were listed, and it
was threatened that all of them, wives and children included, would be
imprisoned in Neutra unless they promised to remain Roman Catholics.
Among other threats, they were told that their children would be taken
from them and the adults banished from the country.
With the prospect of renewed hardships and persecution if they held
to their intentions, and with the beginning of such, suffering already at
their door, they nearly all lost courage and gave way. Those at Velké
Leváre abandoned the undertakings... and those at Sabatisch also took
counsel with flesh and blood, for they said to each other, What is the good
of remaining steadfast if we are to be banished from the country, and our

children are to be left behind and ruined? They also had doubts about the
community in Russia: even if the life there appealed to them, would it
prove to be the true church as Jakob Hutter established it? In the end all
came to an agreement to submit for the present and let things quiet down
again, for God might well show another way so that they could save their
children, too. In the meantime, they would find out more about the church
in Russia.
Some of them, however, were very active. They traveled several
times to Vienna and to other places, and visited a number of different lords
whom they thought might help them (all this at considerable expense). For
at that time the emperor's booklet on toleration had just been issued with
its declaration that each and every one who had been forced to change his
religion now had the freedom to return unmolested to his former faith. But
in fact this applied only to the four main religious denominations: Roman
Catholic, Lutheran, Calvinist, and Greek Catholic.
Three of the brothers even had an audience with the emperor when
they handed in a petition on behalf of the prisoners at Neutra. The emperor
called them to him, took them into a room, and talked with them for threequarters of an hour. He asked them what exactly they found wrong and
offensive in the Roman Catholic religion. They replied, Infant baptism and
the worship of images He then wanted to know what was wrong with
infant baptism, and told them it was not necessary to pray to images, for
he was a Roman Catholic himself, but he did not pray to images. They
should do as he did, and keep to the religion accepted by the head of the
state (by which he meant himself) or else profess the Lutheran, Calvinist,
or Greek Catholic religion. The brothers said they had never found such
certainty of heart as in their former faith, and they begged him to let them
settle in Transylvania or some other place.
The emperor replied, All these countries are in my possession. It
makes no difference where you are Then they asked for his permission to
move to Russia. The emperor said, Why ever do you want to move to
Russia? There's no bread to be had there; besides which, you would have
to turn Orthodox. He talked with them on many other subjects, too, and
finally said One of two things will happen. Either you will be granted

toleration or else you will be sent out of the country. He ordered the
release of the prisoners in Neutra, and they were set free after six weeks in
prison.
Following their release, they were brought before a number of lords
who strongly urged them to become Roman Catholics. One after another,
the brothers consented, except for Jakob Walter. He was the only one who
stood firm. But he was allowed to go free with the others.
Subsequently, all those left at Sabatisch fell away. There was no
courage or staying power in them. They shrank from pain and suffering
and had far too great a fear of men. As far a can be seen they only needed
to hold fast a little longer and show more determination; then their trials
would have passed them by.
Once they had submitted to the Jesuits and agreed to remain Roman
Catholics, they had to go into the church, recant, and make a confession of
faith. They were asked point by point and had to answer each one, then
swear on the rosary and scapular. One of them said in front of everyone in
the church that he was only doing it out of fear, and at heart did not
believe it was right. But the Jesuits did not pursue the matter. They were
satisfied as long as he recanted publicly.
As he watched what was happening, Jakob Walter could expect
nothing but re-arrest and further attempts to coerce him through
imprisonment or other cruel methods. Sad and disheartened, he went to
Anton Ruschek's house in Vienna and wrote a letter to the brotherhood in
Russia, saying that all was at an end, nothing was left of the fire but ashes.
No one should make, the journey to Sabatisch. It was all useless. The
community received this letter, but the brothers had already started for
Hungary several weeks earlier.
From Vienna, Jakob went home to Sabatisch. Fearing to be seen there,
however, he took leave of his wife and children and set out alone to make
his way to the church in Russia. He traveled through the part of Silesia
under Prussian rule and so reached the Moravian Brethren at Gnadenfrei,
then continued to Herrnhut in Saxony. He stopped at Herrnhut for a while
and worked for a potter. From here he wrote back to his Katharina at

Sabatisch to tell her he was safely out of the imperial lands and was now
in Prussian Silesia. The master for whom he was working obtained a pass
for him from his manorial lord, Count von Zinzendorf of Herrnhut in
Saxony. With this pass he was able to travel unhindered through Lemberg
and Kiev to the community in Russia, and on December 28, 1782, he
gained his heart's desire and arrived safely at Vishenka. In the following
year, on January 1, 1783, he united with the church. After the church had
interceded for him, he was accepted into the covenant of grace.
***************

1782 The Third Journey
Joseph Müller and Christian Hofer left Vishenka on August 18. After
earnest prayer they parted from the community amid tears and heartfelt
words of farewell, and set out in God's name for their places of mission.
Nearly the whole community went down with them to the ferry where they
had to cross the river. Brother Joseph wrote back from Kiev and again
from Lemberg that they were both well. Their experiences on the rest of
their journey and the events at Sabatisch will now be related.
Joseph and Christian left Lemberg and continued on their way under
divine protection. They turned off the main road, however, and bore left
into Hungary because they had been told this was a shorter route. They
were not checked at the frontier, so did not get their pass signed. This
afterwards caused them a great deal of trouble.
While going through a town called Nikolasch they met three
Hungarian noblemen in the street, all somewhat drunk.
Perhaps the brothers showed too little respect and deference as they
went by, for the noblemen stopped them and asked for
their pass. Joseph and Christian showed the pass they had received
from our count, the field marshal. The noblemen examined it and found
plenty to quarrel with: first, it had not been signed at the frontier; second,

the count had not signed and sealed the side he had written in German.
They accused the brothers of being spies and bandits and of traveling with
a forged pass. A German apothecary joined them. He translated the pass
into the Slovakian language and said it was in order, and the brothers
explained and excused themselves as best they could. All was of no avail.
Although innocent of any offense, they were handed over to the jailer, who
put them in a dark dungeon and kept tight watch on them.
The brothers fell on their knees and thanked God that they were
counted worthy to suffer in innocence. They pleaded to God with all their
hearts that he might strengthen them and protect them from sin and evil
through his Holy Spirit.
After half an hour, they were taken to the town hall to appear before
the county sheriff and two other noblemen. They were searched and
thoroughly cross-examined on where they had come from and where they
were going. Everything they said was written down. At first they were
treated harshly, but as they always gave the same account of themselves
and spoke with courage and confidence, and as nothing suspicious or
dishonest could be found about them, their interrogators began to
recognize that they were innocent and talked to them in a more friendly
way. The brothers were searched a third time, however, and everything
they had with them was confiscated - money for travel expenses, writings,
knives, and other items.
The two were returned to the dungeon, while the pass was sent to the
county governor. Three days later they were again summoned to the town
hall, as he had arrived with the notary. First they were asked if they held to
their previous statements. They replied, Yes, every time! We will never
say anything different even if we are taken to the emperor. The German
apothecary, who acted as interpreter in the matter, was very sympathetic to
the brothers and put in a good word for them, saying they were honest
people with a valid pass. In the end they received their belongings back,
and the governor wrote a letter and sent a Hungarian guard to accompany
them with orders to ensure that they were not detained again.
Traveling with such an escort brought strange consequences. The first
guard escorted them alone, following the governor's orders. But when they

crossed into another county, a different guard was detailed to go with
them. He was afraid to accompany them by himself, so on reaching a
village he asked the justice of the peace for six extra men, and was
actually given five. The brothers began to be anxious what the
consequences might be. The people came running up to stare at them as if
they were murderers under guard.
At the boundary of the third county there was a German gentleman.
Joseph and Christian explained what had led to their present plight, and
the gentleman simply sent two peasants with them from village to village
as far as Turschain.
There the county sheriff ordered a Hungarian guard to take them to
the commissar at Savatgi. This commissar was also a German. After the
brothers had told him their story he said, I know what to do!
He wrote a letter and gave it to the two-man escort he had provided.
Then he put his seal on the pass and gave that also to the escort. The
brothers did not hear the other instructions he gave by word of mouth.
When they had left the commissar and had reached the far end of the
marketplace, they were brought to a halt. The escort took them into a
small prison where a number of other men were incarcerated, searched
them, carried everything they had to the commissar, and then tied their
hands behind their backs and accompanied them further.
The poor brothers, who had done nothing wrong, had to struggle on
through the mud in wind and rain. This went on for three days until they
reached the village, about a mile from Trentschin, where the county
governor lived. They arrived very late and were put in a room, chained up,
and guarded all night.
The next morning, the governor examined their pass. As there was
nothing wrong with it, he released them, but he sent another guard with
them, and they traveled under escort until they crossed the River Danube
into Austria. Toward their journey's end, the escort consisted only of
peasants, but the brothers were not free to travel alone until the day before
their arrival at Vienna.

Brother Joseph wrote to the community from Warsaw, telling at
greater length what he and Christian had to undergo on this journey. Only a
summary of the main facts is given here. They reached Vienna after
traveling for six weeks.
They stayed overnight at an inn in Leopoldstadt and sent a messenger
to Prince Gallizin's court to ask Anton Ruschek to be so kind as to come
and see them. When he came the following day, he told them of the
situation at Sabatisch: all had fallen away except Jakob Walter, who had
set out alone for the community in Russia. They were horrified, and their
courage ebbed away, for it looked as if the long, wearisome journey had
been for nothing. They wanted to turn around and go straight back home
without attempting anything more. Anton advised this course, too, for he
was extremely frightened that he might get into difficulties for helping in
the exchange of letters between Sabatisch and the community in Russia.
The brothers scarcely knew what they should do. There was too little
leading from God to go to the unfaithful people at Sabatisch. As these had
no intention of striving to return to the faith, Joseph and Christian could
not believe it right to venture into unnecessary danger on their account.
Yet to go straight home with nothing accomplished did not seem right,
either.
After long consideration, they agreed that since there was nothing to
be done with the backsliders at Sabatisch, they would work at transferring
to Russia the value of the property they had left behind in their native land
of Carinthia. Perhaps they could achieve something in this direction, for
they had the necessary documents with them.
They therefore went to the court of the Russian ambassador and gave
their names and their reason for coming. The legal advisors at the prince's
court helped them with a petition which they presented to Emperor Joseph.
Four days later, when brother Christian was again at the imperial palace to
inquire what was happening with their appeal, he met the emperor coming
out of an upstairs room. The emperor noticed him and called, Come in!
Christian went into a room and talked alone with the emperor for almost
half an hour. First Emperor Joseph asked him what he wanted. The brother
said that they had presented a petition to his imperial majesty and did not

know if it had come to his attention. The emperor asked where he was
from. Didn't he come from that group in Hungary?
Yes, replied brother Christian, we belong to them by religion, but by
birth we are from Carinthia. We come from the transmigrants who were
banished in 1755 and sent to the principality of Transylvania.
Yes, Yes, I know, said the emperor.
Then brother Christian asked him most humbly to allow us to have
the value of our lawful property transferred to Russia.
The emperor answered, Come back to your fatherland, and your
homes and farms will be restored to you.
People will not tolerate us, objected the brother. We are always
persecuted.
The emperor said earnestly and impressively, Who persecutes you?
There is no persecution now.
The brother responded, In Hungary, this very summer, six men were
held in prison for more than a month for the sake of their faith.
For a moment the emperor remained silent. Finally he said, Well,
what's it all about? It is such a little thing, such a very small matter. People
must agree to accept a certain creed - Roman Catholic, Lutheran,
Calvinist, or Greek.
The brother said, We do not see them living godly, Christian lives.
Well, said the emperor, you can still be good yourselves and live as
you think fit.
The brother replied, Our hearts cannot find full conviction in any
other way, for Christ the Lord and his apostles tell us to hold to his pure
teaching, to be his disciples and lead a godly, Christian life.

After this, the emperor asked what name we go by, and what had
happened to us in Transylvania. Had we had our own homesteads and had
we been given land? Hadn't the priest who had persecuted us in
Transylvania been called Delphini? What had taken place during the
persecution? How had we reached Wallachia, and where had we lived?
Was the land good? How had we prospered there? Why had we moved to
Russia? In what part of the country had we settled? Had the count given us
sufficient land? Were our houses of stone or wood? Did we have a priest,
and, if so, did he have a wife?
Brother Christian answered all the questions truthfully and in full,
and the emperor listened attentively. Then the brother pleaded once again
for the property we had left in Carinthia. The emperor answered neither
yes nor no. He only inquired how we got out of Russia. When brother
Christian told him that our count had given us a pass authorizing us to
visit relatives in Germany, the emperor let him go and went out, too.
Subsequently, the brothers did their utmost to bring their affairs in
order, going back and forth from one government office to another until
they reached the point where they were supposed to receive their property.
But the government officials said the case must first be transferred to
Hermannstadt, where the assets from Carinthia were now held, and then be
transferred back to Vienna. All this would cause a delay of some ten
weeks.
The brothers could not wait so long. Therefore, they arranged for the
agent from the Transylvanian court to deal with the matter if anything
should come of it. The officials agreed to this, and offered to forward in
due order anything which arrived for us. The Russian ambassador, Prince
Gallizin, was our Count Rumiantsev's brother-in-law, so the currency
exchange would cause no problem.
The following year we received news from Hermannstadt that the
property left behind by members of the community, a value of 2,130
florins, had to be sent with all speed to Vienna. But where it ended up we
never discovered. None of it was ever paid to the community.

The brothers had now finished their task as far as they were able, and
they prepared for the return journey. Nothing could be done at Sabatisch
because the people were too afraid; they were not ready to fight and
struggle for the truth. Without such resolution they could get nowhere, for
if the slightest sign of rebellion was noticed, they were persecuted. While
the brothers were waiting in Vienna, Paul Tschetter and Jakob Wollman
and on one occasion Katharina Walter, came to them, had a long talk, and
told of what was happening at Sabatisch. But the brothers could not help
them as things stood. All they could advise was for them to put their trust
in God, make the venture with him, get away from Sabatisch in secret, and
take to flight. By this means, as time went on, a number escaped.
The brothers wanted, if at all possible, to bring Jakob Walter's wife,
Katharina, and his children to the church community, but they did not
know how to get them from Sabatisch to Vienna. They tried every way and
found what seemed like a good opportunity to accomplish it. The result
was disastrous, however, and plunged the brothers into great danger. The
following is a summary of the story:
***************

1782 The two brothers brought into great difficulties by a
baker
There was a baker who had been in Russia for eighteen years. He,
too, had come to Vienna to transfer his lawful property from the country
but had not succeeded, although he had handed in three petitions to the
emperor. All the money he had brought for the journey was already spent;
he had not even enough left to pay for the pass he must get from the
government (in order to return to Russia). When he heard of the brothers,
who also wanted to go back to Russia, he ingratiated himself with them,
suggesting they should travel together. He asked them to help him by
advancing money to obtain his government pass, with a little more for
travel expenses to Kiev. It would all be paid back later, he said, and he
gave them the names of merchants in Kiev with whom his credit was high

and who would advance him whatever he required. For a long time the
brothers did not want to become involved with him, and Anton Ruschek
also advised against it. They finally consented after he had mentioned how
easily he could have obtained his pass and, if he had only had the money,
would have willingly secured more passes. Then the brothers offered to
give him money for his own pass if he would get another for a woman and
three children. The woman and her children, however, were at Sabatisch in
Hungary and must be brought to Vienna - an extremely dangerous
undertaking. The baker declared it would be simple - no trouble at all - and
immediately agreed to fetch them. In the end, the brothers trusted him,
giving him money for the journey, so he set out to bring Katharina and her
children to Vienna. First he came to Velké Leváre. There he met Elias
Walter and confided in him what he intended to do. Elias was one of the
foremost opponents of the truth. He called the brothers spying scoundrels
who deserved to be hanged, for they had not come to collect their property
but to take people out of the country. As the baker was repeatedly asked if
he had a pass, he realized the great danger he was in, became terrified, and
betrayed the brothers.
He turned back for Vienna. Six days later, he came to the brothers
with a lying story that he had fetched Katharina Walter and her children.
He said he had left them at his lodging but that the brothers must not show
themselves there because the wagoner knew them. To prevent betrayal,
they must at once give him money to pay the man and let him go on his
way. The honest brothers believed these lies, and supplied the money to
pay the wagoner. Early next morning, they went over to the baker's
lodging, hoping to see and encourage Katharina and her children. No one
was there.
The baker now showed what a villain he was. Not satisfied with
getting so much money from the brothers on false pretenses, he wanted to
frighten them into giving more. He demanded six ducats for his pains and
threatened that if they did not give him the sum he would inform the
police of their plan to take so many people out of the country. Then they
would be arrested.

Brother Christian told him bluntly that he would get nothing, no
matter what he might do. Did he suppose the brothers would remain silent
and not defend themselves? Nonetheless, this godless man had brought the
brothers into deep trouble. They expected from one hour to the next that he
would arrive with the police to arrest them. One can well imagine how the
poor brothers felt with their little store of money stolen by fraud and still
worse disaster and danger staring them in the face.
It was high time to be on their way. Disappointed and downhearted,
they prepared for the journey. They made their farewells at the prince's
court, took leave of Anton Ruschek and other officials they knew, and left
Vienna at two o'clock in the afternoon. Meantime the baker, seeing that the
brothers would give him no more money, reported them to the police.
Three men were immediately dispatched to the inn where Christian and
Joseph had lodged. They searched here and at the prince's court, but the
brothers were already three or four hours' journey away. God in his mercy
had protected them from falling into the hands of godless men.
***************

1783 Returned with several Mennonites to the church
When the brothers had, praise God, escaped from danger and were
almost at Krakow, they debated whether they should return straight home
or go into Prussia to the Mennonites at Danzig and Elbing. God made it
clear to them that they should go to Prussia, so they took the route through
Krakow into the kingdom of Poland, and on January 10, 1783, they arrived
safely at Warsaw, the capital. From there, they traveled on by wagon to
Elbing, which they reached on January 22.
The Mennonites received them with much kindness and consideration
and were eager to hear what had been happening to our church community.
The brothers had to recount how we had been persecuted and driven out of
our own country and Transylvania, too, and had come to Russia. They also
had to describe how our community is arranged and organized. All the

Mennonites were pleased at what they heard. They had nothing but praise
for it and did not oppose it in any way. The next day the brothers were
taken out of the town to Ellerwald to see the elder, Gerhard Wiebe, whom
we first got to know in connection with Mathies Hofer. He was delighted
to see them and welcomed them in the most friendly way. The brothers
stayed with him for three weeks. During this time, they had many talks
about articles of faith and other godly and helpful conversations. The
Mennonites did not argue against the truth, but praised the community.
They refused to believe, however, that one cannot be saved outside it. The
elder, Gerhard Wiebe, reported to the congregations near Driesen that men
from the church community in Russia had come to visit him. When the
elders of the congregations heard this, they wrote inviting the brothers to
visit them, too, for perhaps they might help and encourage some to
improve their lives and find salvation. The brothers could not refuse such
a request, although it meant a journey of about 180 miles [290 km]. They
therefore went from Ellerwald to Marienburg, and then by way of
Heubuden, Marienwerder, Schweingrube, and Graudenz to Schwetz,
visiting the congregations in each place. Brother Joseph preached to a
number of them. After going to Schwetz, Przechovka, and Jeziorka, they
finally reached Driesen, Neu-Dessau, Franztal, and Brenkenhoffswalde.
During their twelve-day stay in the neighborhood, several people decided
to travel with them to the church community in Russia.
They then retraced their route through Graudenz and Heubuden, and
went to Danzig before returning to Gerhard Wiebe in Ellerwald.
The brothers found three kinds of Mennonites in the towns and
villages they visited. The first were called Old Flemish: they were quite
smart in appearance, wore buttons on their clothes and trimmed their
beards, but otherwise were moderate in their ways. These lived in Elbing,
Ellerwald, Gross Werder and Klein Werder, Marienburg, and Heubuden.
The second group were called Waterlanders. They lived in Danzig and
the neighboring countryside. They were vain and ostentatious in the way
they dressed and in other ways as well. They, too, wore buttons and shaved
their beards.

The third group were called Groningen Old Flemish. They were the
simplest and most modest in dress, wore only hooks and eyes on their
clothing and let their beards grow. In other ways, they were the same as the
Old Flemish, except that they held firmly to the practice of foot washing at
the Lord's Supper. They lived near Schwetz, Przechovka, Jeziorka, and
Driesen, and in Franztal, Brenkenhoffswalde, and Neu-Dessau.
While the brothers were away, Gerhard kindly looked around for
books for them, and now and then other friendly people gave them a few
as well, so that more than twenty Bibles and other books were collected.
The Mennonites were hospitable and generous toward them in other ways,
too: they made a collection, each out of good will contributing whatever
he wished for the brothers' expenses on the road.
Joseph and Christian bought a wagon and two horses, took leave of
Gerhard and other good friends, and drove toward the Vistula by way of
Schwetz, Culm, and Thorn. Then they went on to Nieschewski to see
Abraham Nickel, elder of the congregation there. Fifteen people had
gathered who were ready to travel with the brothers to the community in
Russia: Els Decker, a widow with five children, Hein, Jakob, Heinrich,
Benjamin, and Eva, and her sister Maria Schmidt with her daughter Maria
(all from Franztal); Liset Knels with her two children, Abraham and
Johannes; also Sara and Heinrich (from Przechovka). From
Brenkenhoffswalde came Eva Rickerts, a widow with two children, Eva
and Annchen; and there was Peter Nachtigall, their wagoner.
They set out from Nieschewski and traveled under divine protection.
It was more than 700 miles [1,135 km] through the kingdom of Poland to
the Russian border at Chernigov, and over 125 miles [200 km] further to
Vishenka. They reached the community in joy and peace on August 2,
1783. *
***************

1783 The Fourth Journey

Brother Jakob Walter could not wait until the brothers returned from
Prussia, for the thought of his wife and children whom he had left at
Sabatisch was a continual weight upon him. He therefore talked with the
church elders and asked them to help him obtain a pass and travel money.
They could not refuse him, because they had received news that still more
wanted to escape from Sabatisch. So his request was granted, and Johannes
Stahl was asked to accompany him on the journey.
On May 2, 1783, they took leave of the church community, many
weeping as the brothers set out. They traveled on in God's name and
arrived at Sabatisch, where they stayed with Paul Tschetter. Brother Jakob
went to the Russian embassy in Vienna, intending to get a pass for his wife
and children. But he received only one - for himself and his traveling
companion.
In the meantime, brother Johannes Stahl stayed in hiding in Paul
Tschetter's house for eleven days. Friends and relatives came to visit him,
talking with him and bringing him food and drink.
When Jakob returned from Vienna without a pass for his wife and
children, they set out on the journey all the same, in the hope and
expectation that God would help them to find the way through, and this
was shown them.
Andreas Stahl with his son, Mathies, also decided to go to Russia, but
he left his wife, Hester, and his daughters in Sabatisch. To Jakob Walter's
pain, he had to leave his oldest daughter, Susanna, at Sabatisch, because a
year earlier she had married an ardent Roman Catholic. In the end,
however, this proved a good help, as we will explain later.
They crossed the border safely into Prussian Silesia and traveled by
way of Olawa, Breslau, and Driesen to the Mennonite church at
Brenkenhoffswalde and Franztal, where they stayed for several days. Here,
a Mennonite named Peter Isaac was full of zeal and courage to go to
Russia. He set out with his wife and four children and accompanied the
brothers. From Driesen, their route lay through Schwetz and Torun to
Warsaw in Poland, and from there to Chernigov in the Ukraine. On August
14, they arrived with much joy at the community in Vishenka.

Very early on the same day, Andreas Wollman, Zacharias Tittel, and
Paul Mändelig also reached the community. Not long before, on July 25,
Jakob Tschetter had arrived alone at Vishenka. These four were young men
about eighteen or nineteen years old. Paul Mändelig was Bohemian by
birth. They had not much grasp of our faith, for they had been born Roman
Catholic and knew little about their forefathers, apart from what they
chanced to hear from their parents.
Their escape from Sabatisch was not in vain, however. Jakob
Tschetter, it is true, fell asleep in the Lord soon after his baptism, which
took place this same year, but the other three are still living today
(December 12, 1794) and are doing useful service in the church
community.
***************

1784 The Fifth Journey
In the autumn of 1783, Gerhard Wiebe wrote a letter from Ellerwald
to the church community in Russia informing us that still more people
from Hungary had reached the congregation in Franztal. They were very
poor and would require support. The new arrivals were Andreas Polman
with his wife, Rösel, and five children, and Andreas Tittel, father of the
Zacharias Tittel already mentioned, with his younger son, Kaspar.
At the same time another letter came from Paul Tschetter in
Sabatisch, telling us that he and many others had a burning desire in their
hearts to come to the church of God in Russia. They asked us to help them
in some way, if it were possible. In addition, Andreas Stahl kept pleading
for help in bringing his wife and two daughters to the community, while
Jakob Walter was deeply concerned for his daughter, Susanna, who was
left behind in Sabatisch.
For all these reasons the elder brothers decided that in spring, God
willing, they should send two brothers again to reach out a hand to those
eager for a new life, and to help them come to the community. When

spring arrived, Johannes Waldner was chosen to make the journey with
Jakob Walter.
After earnest prayer and many tears at their departure, they took leave
of the community and set out in the name of God on March 4, 1784. They
were able to find transport to Elbing where they visited Gerhard Wiebe
and other friends. Then they continued to Marienburg, Gradenz and
Schwetz. When they came to the Mennonites at Przechovka, they met
Andreas Tittel, Andreas Pollman and their families.
In the meantime, Susanna, the daughter Jakob Walter had left behind
in Sabatisch, won over her husband, Tobias Bollmann, to go with her to
join her father in the community in Russia. Similarly Joseph Polman with
his wife and three children, and Hans Polman, too, set out, crossed the
border into Prussian Silesia, and were now with the Mennonites in
Franztal.
When the two brothers, Jakob and Johannes, came from Przechovka
to Driesen and Franztal, Jakob met his daughter Susanna with her husband,
and Joseph with his family. It can well be imagined what great joy there
was on both sides. They stayed three or four days. Then Jakob and
Johannes continued their journey to the place where the church had sent
them. They took Hans Polman with them, but told the others to await their
return.
Near the border between Prussian Silesia and the empire was
Gnadenfeld, a village of the Moravian Brethren. There they were forced to
stop because brother Johannes Waldner fell ill. Brother Jakob did not want
to leave him by himself in a foreign country. They talked over what they
should do and decided the best way was to send Hans Polman to Sabatisch.
Hans was willing to travel alone, so they gave him several letters
addressed to different relatives and asked him to speak personally with
Paul Tschetter and others, assuring them that the church had heard their
plea and would help them, and advising them to set out and come to join
the brothers as soon as possible.
Hans Polman went to Sabatisch and carried out his task. Meanwhile,
brother Johannes Waldner gradually improved.

After two weeks, Hans Polman returned to the brothers at
Gnadenfeld. He brought no one with him. He told them that many were
resolved to undertake the journey, but first they wanted to sell a few things
quietly to get a little money for their expenses on the way. As this meant
they could not leave so quickly, they sent Hans back alone with a message:
Jakob and Johannes should either come to Sabatisch so they could all set
off together, or at least wait at Gnadenfeld.
The two brothers were not at all happy about the message, for they
felt it would be impossible to cross the frontier with such a large group,
and did not think it advisable to go to Sabatisch. If the group were
detained and turned back at the border or elsewhere, the others would be
no worse off than before, while the two from Russia would be severely
treated as criminals who were trying to take subjects out of the emperor's
lands. They were so annoyed with the people at Sabatisch for letting Hans
Polman return alone and making their own plans for everyone to escape
together, that they reacted too sharply and showed too little patience. They
did not even wait in Gnadenfeld. They simply wrote a letter expressing
their dissatisfaction and their reasons for not prolonging their stay, and
then gave directions about the towns the travelers should pass through on
their way to Driesen, where the brothers would now wait for them.
Disappointed and disheartened, the three brothers set out from Gnadenfeld
and returned to Franztal near Driesen.
But everything was going much better than they had expected. When
the brothers did not arrive at Sabatisch within a reasonable time, a group
set out on their own. It consisted of Paul Tschetter, his wife and five
children - the youngest still a baby at the breast; his sister, Katharina, and
her two children; Jakob Walemann with his wife and four children;
Andreas Koller with his wife and two children, the youngest one also still
at the breast; Janne Stern, a Bohemian by birth; Mariele Wirth with her
three children; and Hester Stahl with her two children.
They came safely over the border into Prussian Silesia and reached
Gnadenfeld, expecting to meet the brothers. It was a great disappointment
to find no one there, but they had to accept it. Paul Tschetter at once wrote
a note to Jakob and Johannes in Franztal near Driesen, telling them how

well everything had gone and asking them to wait. The letter caught up
with them and made them very sorry they had not stayed longer in Silesia.
The owner of the Gnadenfeld estate, who also belonged to the
Moravian Brethren, was kind enough to give the group a pass enabling
them to get through to Driesen unhindered. When they reached
Brenkenhoffswalde and Franztal, the longed-for moment came at last, and
they met the two brothers (who had been waiting with equal longing to see
them). There was heartfelt rejoicing on both sides and they gave praise and
thanks to God.
They stopped for only one day to prepare for the journey. They
collected together all they possessed, each one contributing whatever was
left from the provision he had brought for the road, and they put it all at
the brothers' disposal. Jakob and Johannes then cared for all alike for the
rest of the way. They had already come 370 miles [594 km] from Sabatisch
to Driesen, and still had a journey of 920 miles [1,484 km] in front of
them, for when one reckons up the distance from Sabatisch to Vishenka,
following the route through Breslau, Driesen, and Warsaw, it comes to
about 1,335 miles [2,150 km].
The brothers bought three wagons with a pair of horses for each. They
made do with these as well as they could, and about 140 miles [223 km]
on, they came to Thorn, where they were joined by Andreas Tittel,
Andreas Pollmann, and others with them. The group now totaled fortyseven people. Under God's protection they traveled safely and without
hindrance day after day, going by easy stages until after six weeks they
rejoiced to arrive in the community at Vishenka. *
***************

1784 List of all who came from Sabatisch and VelkÈ Lev·re
to Russia
56 souls in all

Jakob Walter with his Katharina and two children:
Jakob and Darius
His son-in-law and daughter: Tobias Bollman and Susanna

Paul Tschetter with his Judith and six children:
Joseph, Martin, Johannes, Barbel, Katherina and Annele

Jakob Waleman with his Assanath and five children:
Andreas, Michael, Barbel, Judith and Assanath
His son-in-law and daughter with their children:
Andreas Koller, Annele
Annele, Barbel and Children

Andreas Stahl with his Hester and three children:
Mathies, Magdalena and Susanna

Katharina Waleman with her two children:
Joseph and Gretel

Joseph Bolmann with his Judith and three children:
Liesel, Mariele and Annele

Andreas Polman with his Rösel and their six children:
Johannes, Adam, Maria, Barbel, Katherine and Eva

Mariele Wirth with her three children:
Andreas, Jeremias and Mariele

Andreas Tittel with his two children:
Zacharias and Kaspar

Johannes Stern
Jakob Tschetter
Paul Mändelig
***************

1784 Account of subsequent events
Soon afterward, another three families, about fourteen people in all,
started on their way to Russia. But when they were a quarter of a mile
from the frontier they were stopped, forced to go back, and imprisoned in

Neutra for a whole year until at last they were released at the emperor's
command. This frightened the others to such an extent that from this point
no one else attempted the journey. Somewhat later we received a letter
from Sabatisch telling us that there were still many sons of Zebedee who
wanted to sit at the right and left hand of Christ in his kingdom, but that no
one was willing to share Christ's cup of suffering. (Mark 10:35-39)
Jakob Schultz, Mathies and Joseph Dangler, Abraham Roth, Abraham
Baumgartner, and Andreas and Härich Schmid all stayed behind. These
were the best and most respected among them, who still had some
knowledge of the old faith and some recognition of its truth, but they
could not tear themselves away from their property. They waited on and on
for God to make them worthy to act, but never brought themselves to it,
and in the end one after the other died with a burdened conscience and
without consolation.
The Mennonites who had come to the community with Joseph and
Christian could not all submit themselves. Els Decker with her children,
her sister Maria with her daughter, and Lieset Knels with her two children
united with the church, but Eva Rickerts with her daughters, Peter Isaac
with his wife and children, and Heinrich and Sara returned to Prussia in
the spring of 1784. Peter Isaac's eldest daughter, Maria, left her father and
mother and remained in the church community.
They had many complaints against the community. They wanted the
practice of foot washing introduced at the Lord's Supper. They defended
private property, asserting it was justified by Holy Scripture. The way was
simply too narrow for them, and self-denial and complete surrender were
too hard.
It was the same with some who came from Sabatisch. They did not all
become living members of the body of Christ. Although like Lot's wife
they had left Sodom and made the long journey to the community, for
some of them it remained fruitless. For life in community was not free
from hardships and struggles. Everything possible was done to find room
to house the people, but we could not meet everyone's needs and wishes.
Added to these difficulties, sickness broke out, and as we had too little
accommodation and lived too closely together, a few had to get by with

scarcely a place to lie down or anything else, and they suffered from the
overcrowding. These conditions required patience, and some people had a
great battle to wage between faith and doubt, spirit and flesh. Their spirit
was willing and their first intentions had been good, yet when the time
came for deeds, some flagged and weakened. But they were all united with
the church except Rösel and her son, Hans Polman. Some time later
Andreas Stahl and his wife Hester also left the community.
The following year was a season of great scarcity, and we had to
reduce our food consumption while our workload was increased because of
all the building. But, praise God, none of us needed to go hungry.
In this year 1784 the big house was started. At first the walls were
made of mud bricks. They were built two stories high with small rooms
for bedrooms on the attic floor. The ground-level room to the west was set
up as a pottery and a new kiln was constructed there, since Jakob Walter,
Andreas Waleman, Zacharias Tittel, Paul Mändelig, and Jäne Stern were
all potters by trade. The other half of the house, facing east, was used for a
dining room, but only the first room was finished that summer.
In autumn, before the onset of winter, we moved into the new house.
We had been living there only a few weeks when the mud brick walls
suddenly collapsed. The foundation had not been raised high enough above
ground-level, the mud bricks absorbed the damp from the earth and
windows, and with so much weight resting on them, the weakened walls
gave way. But the wall to the north and the roof it supported did not fall,
and, praise God, no one was hurt. The pottery was patched up well enough
for work to go on during the winter.
The next summer the fallen walls were rebuilt with stone and fired
brick, and in 1788 we finished the east end of the other story where we
now have the weaving room and meeting house.
***************

1784 Plea for descendants to remember forefathers

Now, I speak especially to you, dear children and descendants of the
brothers and sisters who came from Sabatisch and Velké Leváre in
Hungary to join the church community in Russia, a people whom God, in
his great love and compassion, led out of error by his almighty hand, saved
from destruction, and so satisfied the deepest desire of their hearts.
I plead with you to remember at all times the great grace, love, and
mercy which God has granted to us and to you and your forefathers. Do
not let it be in vain. Remember and take deeply to heart how your fathers
strove and labored, and how much in earnest they were to save their souls
and yours. They were willing to make sacrifices, and it certainly cost them
something to risk leaving house and home and all they possessed in order
to set out with their wives and little children on such a journey over a
distance of more than 1,350 miles [2,200 km]. For your encouragement, I
remind you that not a single step taken in vain by those who acknowledge
such generous help and thank God for it with all their hearts for the rest of
their lives; who live in accordance with the bond they have made and
remain faithful to the last as, praise God, some of your fathers have done
and have already overcome and attained a blessed end.
Never have they regretted this toil and hardship, even though at times
the struggle was hard and bitter enough before the spirit triumphed over
the flesh. How ardently they thanked God that he accounted them worthy
of this grace, that he helped them out of the pit and snare of sin and
reconciled them once more with God and his church.
Because you are by birth the children of those valiant fighters for the
faith, you should be all the more zealous to follow in the steps your fathers
took in faith, so that we are not only proud of our forefathers, their names,
and their religion for this by itself is no help to our salvation - but much
rather follow them in courage and sincerity, in their upright, God-fearing,
and blessed way of life.
For your sake, for your good, and because of the especial love I bear
to you and to all believers, I have collected and summarized this history so
that you might have a reliable report of the time you came to this country,
the ways and means by which you traveled, and the reasons for your
coming here (for the blessedness and salvation of your souls).

Therefore, I urge and plead with you: Never turn away from the
gathering of believers, but remain true and faithful to God and to the
brothers and sisters, as each of you has promised of his own free will in
the covenant of baptism.
It is possible some might have better outward circumstances if they
were in the world and not in the church community of the Lord. We cannot
know this, however. It is something completely uncertain, something that
might be, or again might not be. But as regards their salvation, they would
unquestionably be in the utmost danger.

Our dear brother sings: *
The ark represents the Church of God.
Those who do not enter and remain in it will have to suffer the
torment of the eternal fire.

Another sings: **
It is my joy and desire to be
among the faithful who fear and love God.
Wife, children, servants, the worthless things of the world –
you must be treated as thieves.
Away, away with worldly glory!
Away with such filth!
I journey to believing men.
Your end will be the lake of fire

after your carousing and gluttony.

The brother who made this verse was Antoni Erfordter, from
Klagenfurt in Carinthia, who himself left wife and child to go to the
church community of God at Steinabrunn in Austria.- David says, I would
rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than dwell in the tents of
the wicked. (Psalm 84:10)
In past times our brothers in Christ, and yours, too, recognized and
believed it was a great grace when they could be together. (We see this
during the harsh persecution that went on for five years. In the end they
were forced to separate, but if it l had been God's will they would much
rather have died together than have parted from one another.) They wanted
each brother, and sister to remember how kind God is to us when he
gathers his flock, his own children, in one place and does not leave them
straying in the evil, impure life of the world among shameless people. In
such places, people who love God must often weep and grieve at heart as
Lot did in Sodom, and would rather sleep under a bench where the
believers live together than have a good bed among unbelievers.
In writing this I have tried to give you a little direction, so that you
think more deeply about the grace and compassion of God.
***************

1784 Johannes Hofer deserted the Church
In this same year, 1784, Johannes Hofer left the church. Judging
from the way he behaved, it was nothing but self-will, arrogance, misused
intelligence, and overweening self-satisfaction that drove him away. I will
give a short account of what happened.
This Johannes Hofer was a young man of twenty-one, naturally quick
and intelligent. While still a boy he had read diligently in the Holy

Scriptures and other religious books. When he became a brother and was
put to work in the smithy, he was even more diligent in his reading, and he
began to make up songs and expound Scripture. Sometimes, he spent
nearly the whole night in these occupations, so that the next day, when he
was expected to do his work alongside the others, he was worn out, unfit
for his task, and produced very little. As time went on, this led to trouble
between him and the master smith, who sometimes admonished Johannes
for getting so little done. Johannes replied to the effect that they were
laboring for mere temporal things, which were not very important.
Whenever someone tried to instruct him to explain how to do various tasks
in the fields or elsewhere, he always knew better, began to contradict and
quarrel, and always had to be in the right and have the last word.
According to him, the whole brotherhood and especially the elders
and other responsible brothers were very far from what they should be. He
often spoke contemptuously about them to those of his own age. Most of
all he criticized and found fault with dear brother Joseph Kuhr as church
Elder. Johannes was strongly of the opinion that not so much emphasis
should be placed on temporal things - in other words, on work. There
should be much greater zeal for spiritual concerns. Brothers should be sent
out to convert people. In his view, a great church should be built up as in
our forefathers' time.
In spite of his knowing so much, little virtue, dedicated obedience, or
humility could be found in him - only self-conceit, which led to contempt
for his neighbor, answering back, stubbornness, and disobedience. These
faults gradually marred his good points until they ceased giving anyone
pleasure. Many regarded him as headstrong and obstinate and avoided his
company. Consequently, he was no use whatever in the church.
When he saw what he had brought upon himself and that nobody took
notice of what he said, he made up his mind to go into Germany to
proclaim the Gospel of truth and establish a community.
No one could dissuade him from this idea, although his cousins and
other relatives, who still loved him, tried hard to hold him back. Once he
had made up his mind, he would not alter it. He tried to talk other young
brothers into taking his side and traveling with him, but he had no success.

Following his own set plan, he undertook the journey alone and
arrived safely at Sabatisch. He made inquiries and heard from many
people that they would gladly return to their earlier faith if they only had
the freedom to do it. This encouraged him to go to Prussian Silesia to look
for a place where he could start a community. He approached the royal
government at Breslau and presented a petition promising that he would
bring people into the country on condition they were granted religious
freedom and a place to live.
The authorities readily agreed and sent him with an open letter and a
sealed document to the district magistrate of Gross Strehlitz in Upper
Silesia. The magistrate was instructed to implement his requests.
Johannes went to Gross Strehlitz, and when the magistrate had read
the letter from the royal council and heard from the young man himself, he
was delighted. He promised to obtain extensive privileges from the king if
only such people could be brought into his district to build up a
community - people like those in Moravia in earlier times who had been
known as Anabaptists. Their reputation for honesty and trustworthiness
was still remembered. Moreover, circumstances were very favorable, for
the magistrate had previously had a colony of thirty-two houses built in
this same district at the king's expense. He had settled a number of
immigrants there, advanced money, and allowed a year rent-free. For all
his effort, they were bad, slovenly people, for when the free year was over,
many had moved away without a word, and now many of the houses were
standing empty. He also had a manor house and a well-established farm at
the same place. He promised to give it all to Johannes if he would only
bring people to start a community. Johannes could not have wished for a
better opportunity. All he lacked was the people. He took leave of the
magistrate, who had provided him with a pass and money for the journey,
and he returned to Sabatisch. From there he wrote a letter to the
brotherhood in Russia, telling them what a wonderful opportunity he had
found for establishing a new community. He urged them to send a servant
of the Word with several other brothers to the place he described, and said
he hoped and expected that in a short time many hundred people would
flock to the faith, for wherever one went there were many seekers on fire
for the truth. In addition, he admonished the brotherhood not to be so slack

and lazy in doing the Lord's work of gathering the elect: We should not sit
in our paneled houses, like a goose brooding on her eggs, while the Lord's
house was left ruined and forsaken! Finally, he warned us in the strongest
terms that if we did not comply with his request we would have to answer
for it at the Last Judgment. His letter, still extant, deals with this theme at
great length and is full of scolding and unedifying expressions.
When the letter reached the community, the elders met to consult
about what should be done in the matter. They could not believe that God
would use such a self-willed and self-appointed man to gather his elect. As
no one felt urged by God, we did nothing at all, and nothing at all resulted
from Johannes Hofer's wonderful plans. From time to time over a number
of years, people brought us news of his doings in Sabatisch. He had stayed
for eleven weeks in the attic of a woman named Dangler. In the end no one
visited him anymore, and they grew so tired of having him that they asked
him to move on. Since then, we have heard nothing of his whereabouts. It
is quite possible, however, that he will reappear some time in the future,
for strange things can happen with people.
I have written his story to warn each one of us against placing too
much confidence in himself, in his own wisdom and understanding, thus
deceiving himself and going overboard to his own ruin. We should rather
remember what the holy apostle
Philippians 2:3 Paul teaches us, in humility count everyone better
(and thus also wiser) than yourselves.
Until now, 1819, we have received no news of him. *
***************

1784 Christian Wurtz also fell away
At about the same time Christian Wurz began to weaken in faith and
fell away from the church, although he was not completely separated until
1786. His story is as follows:

For a long time we had treated people in the community with home
remedies only. In Transylvania and Wallachia and for some years in
Russia, we did not use bloodletting or other medical treatment. After a
time, we began to rely more on such measures for our people, and in
several emergencies we sought the advice of doctors and surgeons. At last
we came to a point where it was considered a practical necessity to have a
brother in the church community who understood a little about medicine,
even if only about bloodletting, so that we were not obliged to go out
seeking help from the world for every medical problem
About 1780, a good opportunity arose. Count Rumiantsev was living
on his estate at Tschereschinka at the time and had with him a French
doctor named Alphorus Francia.
After we had met this doctor several times, got to know him, and
indicated that we would be glad to have a doctor in the community, he
offered to train one of our brothers if we would like to send someone to
him.
The brothers talked over this possibility and Christian Wurz was
chosen as suited for the task. He was twenty-six years old, had a wife and
three children, and was trusted by everyone. He was endowed by nature
with a good intellect and skillful hands.
So with the knowledge and permission of Count Rumiantsev, we let
Christian go to Dr. Francia. We made an agreement that in dress and other
points he should keep to the ways customary in the community and should
not have to obey in any matter contrary to our faith.
For a time, this brother remained firm enough and did his best to
defend our faith and the truth, so that the brotherhood expected he would
soon become a help to them. They were disappointed, however, for as time
went on he began to forsake the simplicity of Christ and to be attracted to
the world. He had worldly clothes made for himself and later shaved off
his beard; he swore an oath in order to be registered in the emperor's
service. We let all this pass in the hope that when he came home he would
once more act like a brother and submit to all the church's directions. But
although he pretended he was still a brother, his heart had already turned

away from God and the believers. As a result he fell into one sin after
another and was no different from a worldly person with cursing,
swearing, and other unseemly behavior. He even began to speak
contemptuously of several God-fearing brothers. Among many other
things, he said that our forefathers' faith and church order were nothing but
man-made inventions. Finally, when he asked to be allowed to wear a wig
with a braid, we gave him a curt refusal; when he wore one all the same,
he was excluded from the brotherhood. The church community was told he
was an unfaithful member and should be avoided. He forsook the truth, his
faith, God and the church, and his wife and children, too. Later he moved
from Glukhov to Moscow, and for a short time he did very well according
to the flesh, diverting himself with worldly pleasures and luxury. But his
good time soon came to an end, for he died in January 1792 in Moscow.
Thus in a few years, three of the most skillful and best-educated
brothers left the church. They excelled many others in knowledge and
intelligence, and they might have filled a useful place as brothers in the
church if they had continued to use their gifts humbly and simply. Mathies
Hofer and Johannes Hofer fell away to the right, Christian Wurz to the
left. (Mathies Hofer and Johannes Hofer were not brothers by blood.) *
***************

1783 New tax imposed on the country & community
In 1783, there was a new tax assessment. The czarina imposed on the
ordered the people of the Ukraine to be registered, and officials from the
Imperial Chancery at Novgorod came to our household and registered
everyone in the community. Then a head tax was imposed on all
inhabitants of the country, the church community included. Seventy
kopeks were levied on every male, even if he were only three days old, and
two kopeks as surcharge on every ruble. Altogether, the sum came to 58
rubles, 55 kopeks. In addition we had to pay the count 46 rubles, 40 kopeks
annually as land tax. This raised our obligations to 104 rubles, 95 kopeks.

Until this time, the Ukraine had preserved its privileges and its
freedom from Russia. Many Cossacks lived there and were as independent
as noblemen. Some owned considerable property in fields, woods, and
meadows, and did not need to pay taxes. If war came, however, it was their
duty to defend the frontiers and perform similar services for the czarina.
The peasants had to pay taxes on their fields or else do compulsory labor,
but they did not need to supply soldiers. This registration and imposition
of a head tax put an end to all rights and privileges, making the Ukraine
the same as Russia.
The church community wanted to be exempt from the registration for
the head tax by the Imperial Chancery. We were afraid it would rob us of
our privileges, and we complained to the count. But the czarina's order
applied to the whole population. If people wished to remain and earn their
livelihood in this country, they could receive no exemption. The
community possessed arable land, woods, and meadows, so the count told
us that he could do nothing to alter the order. What he did, however, was to
have the community registered at the chancery in Novgorod as contract
workers (who were free to move away at any time).
***************

1786 Jakob Walter's tragic drowning/famine
On July 13, 1785, a dreadful accident took place, causing much grief
and mourning in the community. In May of this year, the elders had
appointed Jakob Walter as schoolmaster, and he had done all he could to
fulfill his task. It happened that on this Sunday afternoon in July, Jakob
took the schoolchildren over to the little island, meaning to let them swim
in the Desna. His daughter Susanna and another sister from the school
were with him. When they reached the island and were getting out of the
boats, he was not enough aware of the need to keep the children together.
The biggest boys ran ahead, racing for the water and each trying to be the
first one in. Brother Jakob and the two sisters helped the little children out
of the boats, and by the time they reached the river at the swimming place,

two of the boys were already out of their depth. This was a terrible shock
to Jakob. In his anxiety, the only thing he could think of doing was to rush
fully clad into the river to try to rescue the boys. But the water was so deep
that he was unable to help them. He lost his life in the attempt, drowning
together with Tobias Hofer, Christian Hofer's son, a lively boy of eight.
David Hofer, like Tobias, had got into deep water, but he was rescued by
two Russian fishermen who were fishing from their little boat not far
away. Everyone can imagine what grief and heartbreak this brought to the
whole community, especially to the near relatives.
Great efforts were made to search for the bodies and they were found
and sorrowfully carried to their burial in the cherry orchard, where their
graves are beside those of other believers.
The year 1786 was one of famine. A chetvert of wheat was worth
eight rubles, in some places ten or twelve rubles. Many of the old people
said they had never in their lives known such scarcity. It was the result of a
series of particularly wet years. *
Many poor people suffered hunger and privation. They eked out an
existence as best they could, mixing chaff from the wheat and buckwheat
into the bread dough to make it go further. Some ground bark from the oak
trees and mixed it in the flour. Some ground acorns to bake into bread, but
it did them no good, for after eating it they swelled up, and many of them
even died.
The famine continued into the following year, 1787, with very little
bread anywhere, so that many people turned to theft. During this difficult
period of scarcity, God mercifully provided a way for his children, so that
they were not hard hit by the famine. By God's blessing, our land was in
such good cultivation that the yield was enough for our bread supply and
we did not need to buy much. In fact, we were able to help many of our
neighbors who were in need. Our mills brought in something as well. We
were forced to restrict our food a little, but no one had to go hungry.
Eternal praise and thanks to God in Heaven for his gracious help and
blessing! May he continue to keep his little flock in his loving care.
***************

1787 Negotiations about war taxes
In 1787, war broke out again between the Turks and the Russians,
and another tax was imposed on the people to pay for it. Every
householder was to contribute a fixed sum of money and several quarters
of flour.
When this tax was demanded of us, as of all the people in the country,
we explained to the count's officials that we could not pay war taxes. It
was against our faith and consciences. The contract that we had made with
the count exempted us from paying such taxes.
The officials had to present their accounts to Count Rumiantsev's
head man, Peter Jurkevitch. He refused our request for exemption, saying
the tax was ordered by the czarina and we must pay it. When we made it
clear that we could not and would not pay, no matter what the
consequences, he told us to take our concern to the count and arrange the
matter with him ourselves.
This made it necessary for us to send two brothers to the count.
Brother Paul Glanzer and brother Elias Wipf were chosen to ask, in all
friendliness, that he not try to force us to act against our faith and our
consciences. In the meantime, Peter Jurkevitch had written his own report,
informing the count that we refused to obey the czarina's order and also
accused him and his officials of dishonoring the contract they had made
with us. The count was infuriated to hear that we accused him of breaking
the contract. The order had come from the czarina and not from him, he
said, and we were not being asked to provide soldiers, only money and
bread - things that everyone needed, ourselves included. In his rage he
declared that he would write to the chief of police in Novgorod to order
him to drive us from the country. Our stiff-necked obstinacy in opposing
the czarina's command would give other subjects a bad example.
The two brothers were sent off on October 12 to Barifioka, where
they asked for an interview with the count. For a long time he would not

grant one, so they turned to Count Capubane, a nobleman who was also at
Barifioka and whom we knew well. They begged him to say a good word
for us to Count Rumiantsev and obtain permission for us to see him; but as
Count Rumiantsev was still very angry, Count Capubane flatly refused to
intervene or say one word on our behalf. He advised the brothers to return
home, for nothing could be done at present.
Paul and Elias were at a loss to know what to do next. They did not
want to go home, leaving the task unfinished. They waited a day or two
until they had been there about ten days in all. At last the count sent his
servant to call them, and when they came to him and were asked what they
wanted, the brothers told him that the officials on his estate were requiring
us to pay the newly-imposed war tax. Since payment was against our faith
and consciences, and we had been exempted from it in our contract, we
humbly asked the count to let us keep to the terms originally agreed.
The count showed no trace of annoyance with the brothers; he told
them in a very friendly way that he had not the remotest intention of
breaking the contract. But the order in question came from the czarina and
he could do nothing to alter it. He could defy the czarina's order. In his
opinion, however, the order contained nothing opposed to the contract, for
everyone had to have bread and money. He tried to convince the brothers
of this. There was further talk, but it is impossible to record it all.
The brothers refused to let plausible arguments drive them from the
church's conviction, which is founded in the truth. They insisted that it was
not a Christian's task to take revenge and spill blood; therefore, it was not
right to pay taxes to promote such purposes. In God's sight, paying taxes
or contributing toward war and bloodshed in any way is the same as taking
an active part in them; therefore, we could not and would not do it. We
would patiently await whatever God permitted to happen to us.
The count answered shortly, Then you had better move out. I cannot
help you. Brother Elias thanked him for being so gracious as to permit us
to move away without hindrance. At the same time, brother Paul begged
him to be kind enough to let us remain on his land and in the shelter of our
own homes until spring, not to make us move our little children, widows,
and orphans just at the onset of winter. The count replied, It won't turn out

as badly as you imagine. After thanking him, the brothers asked for a
written statement so that they would have something to show his estate
officials. He said, It is not necessary. I will in any case write and tell them
what to do. The two brothers returned home and reported about the
interview. We could only conclude that we would have to leave his
property unless the Lord intervened to soften his heart. We waited to
discover what he wrote to his official on his estate at Vishenka. As we
never found out, I will briefly report how the officials dealt with us. When
Jurkevitch heard that the brothers were home again, he sent for some of
the elders and asked what answer they had received. The brothers told him
everything exactly as the count had said it. Jurkevitch would not believe
that the count had given us permission to move. He made many threats and
said that he would carry off the older and more responsible brothers to
Novgorod, where they would be put in prison to starve in the stocks until
they were obedient.
The brothers refused to be intimidated and held firmly to their
statement that we could not pay war taxes. Finally, he ordered the brothers
to call a church meeting upon their arrival home in order to ask each
member whether he would obey the czarina's commands. They were to
report back the results.
The two brothers returned to the community and told what a grim,
menacing aspect the affair was assuming, and we made daily intercession
to God in the common prayer in the whole circle and at other times, too.
We pleaded that he would not forsake his people, that if it was his gracious
will for us to suffer persecution and to be robbed of all our worldly goods,
he would give us patient endurance and steadfast courage, and would
protect us from sin and evil.
On October 23, the whole community was gathered and the matter
was laid before them: We must now pay war taxes or else leave house and
land and accept a life of hardship. Each one must declare which he will
choose. We, the elders, are resolved to hold true to the church's Confession
of Faith no matter what it costs. All the brothers in the church were
unanimous in declaring their agreement with the elders, choosing sorrow
and hardship for the sake of God and his truth rather than acting against

his commandments and willfully committing sin. Each one was
determined to suffer pain and misfortune with all believers and to accept
whatever God in his love might send us.
When the meeting was over, Peter Jurkevitch dispatched a soldier to
summon the elders again. Brother Joseph Kuhr (the church Elder), brother
Elias Wipf, and one other brother appeared before him. He immediately
asked what the brotherhood had decided to do. Since brother Elias was the
best at speaking Russian, he was the brothers' spokesman and replied that
we had done as requested: we had called a church meeting and put the
question to every member. Not one had consented to paying the tax, for it
was contrary to our faith. Rather than act against our faith, we would
abandon everything.
Peter Jurkevitch began speaking a little more mildly. He regretted
that we had put so much work and effort into establishing ourselves, since
it was very possible we would have to abandon everything and turn our
backs on it all. The brothers replied, No one can be sorrier to leave than we
are, for we have put a lot of toil and sweat into preparing the place - but
what else can we do? There is no alternative. God and our faith are more
precious to us than our temporal goods. It is not the first time we have
given up everything. We trust in God. He will not forsake us. He is able to
lead us to another place and give us houses and land again.
When he realized that we were in sober earnest and that we would
leave house, land, and all we had and move away rather than agree to
paying war tax, Peter Jurkevitch dismissed the brothers. They were part of
the way home when he called them back because he had a few words to
say. Then he told them, I should be sorry to lose you. I am not going to let
you move away. You are useful, honest, decent people. Couldn't we find
some other way, such as your paying the count a fixed sum of money every
year, since it is against your faith to help the czarina for war purposes and
you refuse to do so?
We could not be completely exempt from taxes, he said, because we
were given the same protection as everyone else in the country. The
brothers said that we would be satisfied with this solution, and we would
gladly do what was fair and right and not in opposition to our faith.

Peter Jurkevitch said, If you are satisfied and the count gives his
permission, we will draw up a new contract with you on this point, but the
previous contract shall still be in full force. When we consented, he wrote
to the count about then terms he had proposed and we had accepted, saying
that if the count were agreeable, he, Jurkevitch, would draw up a fresh
contract with us on the subject.
Beyond doubt, God in Heaven had heard our prayers and
supplications; he spared his people by moving the count's heart with pity,
so that he, too, was satisfied and wrote the following short note to Peter
Jurkevitch: I permit a new contract to be made with the colonists, but they
should be careful and not undertake any measures I do not like.
On receiving the count's answer, Peter Jurkevitch completed the
following contract:
***************

1787 New contract made
On December 5, 1787, the subsequent points were agreed and laid
down by his Lordship the Field Marshal, Senator, and knight of various
orders, Count Peter Alexandrovitch Rumiantsev Zadunaysky, by the
officials on his Vishenka estate, and by the Vishenka colonists:
WHEREAS, these colonists have enjoyed every possible privilege
without the least hindrance since they settled in the village of Vishenka on
his lordship's estate (and still enjoy the same), paying the estate officials
an annual rent of 46 rubles and 40 kopeks for the land they hold, and
leasing it on the same conditions as all other of his lordship's dependents;
WHEREAS they pay an additional 52 rubles for head tax to the
Novgorod Treasury and must also pay the required tax for every new
arrival they register in the community, namely 70 kopeks for every male
plus a surcharge of 2 kopeks on every ruble, thus making a sum of 58

rubles and 55 kopeks, so that annual rent and head tax total 104 rubles and
95 kopeks:
WHEREAS in this present time of war they have been required to
provide further contributions for provisions, transport, and drivers, but
cannot comply with these requirements because of their articles of faith:
WHEREAS they would be troubled in conscience if they acted in
contradiction to their articles of faith and yet do not wish to be
disobedient. They have therefore found it good to pay the estate officials
an annual sum for ground rent, head tax, and other taxes of whatsoever
description imposed by Her Majesty, the said sum to total 75 rubles every
six months, or 150 rubles annually, effective July 1 of the current year.
This agreement is made on the condition that they are allowed in future to
exercise all previous privileges and that apart from the forenamed sum no
other taxes or impositions may be placed on them at any time, the estate
officials to be responsible for all of the above.
This contract has been concluded with the colonists by consent of
both parties. In witness that it will be faithfully observed in the future, it
hereby receives the appended signature according to the count's wishes.
Knight and Colonel Peter Jurkevitch

The brothers were well-satisfied with this contract, although we
would have liked to have seen Peter Jurkevitch lower the payment to 135
or 140 rubles. No matter how much we pleaded with him, however, he
refused to reduce it.
Two identical contracts were made in the Russian language and script.
One had to be signed by all elders, and this was kept in the lawyer's office
by the estate management. Peter Jurkevitch signed the other and put his
usual seal on it; this copy was given to the brothers.
Thus we once more found a peaceful arrangement with the estate
management, and we praised and thanked God that he had intervened so

graciously and led to a good outcome. We also felt it would be right to
thank the count for his kindness, so the same two brothers, Paul Glanzer
and Elias Wipf, were sent with a little present to visit him in Barifioka.
Now everything was completely different. They were able to see him the
very first day, thank him on behalf of the church community, and ask him
not to hold anything against us. The count was quite friendly toward them,
said he was grateful for their good will, and inquired if they were now
satisfied with what had been arranged. The brothers answered, Yes. Before
they left, he asked them to give his kind regards to the whole community.
The brothers once more thanked him for his kindness, took their leave, and
returned home safely with their task accomplished.
From that time on the church community of the Lord has lived
quietly and in peace. The famine lessened and the Famine abated, field
crops improved. For all such blessings we owe thanks and praise to God.
***************

1788 Many brothers were lost through sickness
On September 18, 1788, our dear brother Johannes Stahl fell asleep
in the Lord with a peaceful heart in Vishenka in the
Ukraine. He was sixty-two years old. We told of him earlier in this
book; he was exiled from Transylvania with Joseph Kuhr.
This brother set up the pottery in Wallachia and again in the
community in Russia and brought it into good running order. In spring
1789, we rented some land at Boramsker for summer grazing, making a
yearly payment to Lord Pracher Ibannovitch, who at that time was
administrator of the czarina's estates. The pasture we had been using in
Vishenka was not sufficient in summer. Brother Elias Wipf was put in
charge of the property.
On July 1, 1790, Elisabeth Straus from Hermannstadt arrived at the
community with her daughter, Liesel Bilner, and Juliana Laussner, the

daughter of her deceased sister Christina. Also with her was Joseph Kuhr
from Alwinz, grandson of our Joseph Kuhr. All these reached the
community safely and in good health, and were at last where their hearts
longed to be. We welcomed Elisabeth with her relatives and took them in.
In 1790 and in 1792, God afflicted us with much sickness. In the
course of a few years the community lost many young, strong brothers at
the height of their powers and well able to fill a useful place:
Jakob Decker from Prussia, a single brother of twenty and a weaver
by trade. He died of tuberculosis.
Mathies Stahl from Sabatisch, a tailor, twenty-two years old. He, too,
died of tuberculosis.
Joseph Tschetter from Sabatisch, a young brother seventeen years of
age who was a smith.
Paul Hofer, a man of thirty-five, very valuable in the work. He served
faithfully in the mill and had been in charge of milling for fourteen years.
Johannes Stern from Sabatisch, a potter of twenty-seven.
Andreas Koller from Velké Leváre, a smith, thirty-eight years old.
Johannes Wipf from Alwinz, thirty-eight years old, who faithfully
served the community working in the distillery. He, too, died of
tuberculosis.
Samuel Hofer, a miller, twenty-two years of age.
A number of sisters and children also died.
On March 23, 1792, dear brother Mathies Müller fell asleep in the
Lord. He was thirty-five and had served the church as a diligent, faithful
schoolmaster for six years, a task for which God had given him special
gifts and aptitude. He was the first brother who had not been baptized as a
child.

Shortly afterward, on May 2 of the same year, dear brother Joseph
Müller fell asleep in the Lord with a peaceful heart at the age of forty-two.
He had been a servant of the Word for twelve years and was a zealous,
God-fearing man, tireless in both spiritual and practical concerns. The loss
of these two brothers was a profound grief to the whole church community.
In addition to the service of the Word, Joseph Müller had done medical
work and had shown great dedication in it.
The son of the younger Johannes Stahl, Lorenz Stahl, an intelligent
boy of sixteen, had been chosen as Joseph Müller's assistant and had
already made good progress. But he became sick, too, and he fell asleep in
the Lord three days before brother Joseph. There was no one left in the
community with experience in bloodletting or other medical treatments.
Many brothers pondered over this and felt there must be some significance
in the two being taken from us at the same time.
After dear brother Joseph Müller's death it was necessary to elect
another servant of the Word. Because of his age, brother Joseph Kuhr had
been freed for some years from holding meetings, although he still acted
as Elder. So at that time there was only brother Johannes Waldner to
preach the Word of God to the church.
For a week we prayed earnestly to God that he grant his church a
faithful servant to replace the previous one and show us which brother he,
in his divine wisdom, had chosen to care for his church. This important
proceeding took place on May 13. When the lots were drawn, God showed
us that brother Andreas Wurz should do this service. In a meeting of the
whole church he was appointed to a time of testing.
In the following year, 1793, on January 16, at Vishenka in the
Ukraine, he was confirmed in the service of the Gospel with laying on of
hands by the elders.
On March 2, 1793, our dear brother Michel Hofer fell asleep in the
Lord with a peaceful heart. He was forty-eight years old and had faithfully
assisted the steward for eight years. Brother Jakob Hofer was appointed to
help the steward in his place.

***************

1793 Two brothers sent to Sabatisch/nothing achieved
For some years no one had come to the community from Sabatisch
and no letters had arrived. Those who had relatives there went several
times to the elders, asking for two brothers to be sent on a further visit,
since it might still be possible to save some of the people's souls.
After a time, their wishes were fulfilled Brother Andreas Waleman
and brother Veit Glanzer were chosen for the task and a pass was obtained
from the count. We prayed earnestly for their journey, taking heartfelt
leave of them with many tears. On June 28 of the same year, they started
on their way to Sabatisch, where they visited relatives and friends.
There was little they could do, however, for all courage and
enthusiasm were extinguished. The steadiest, most serious people - the
ones we had thought most promising - had nearly all died. Abraham Roth
and Abraham Baumgartner were still living, but the zeal they had felt for
the salvation of their souls was quite dead. The brothers offered to take
Baumgartner with them and get him a pass so that he could travel in
safety, but he was unwilling to accept the offer.
The brothers stayed with Joseph Dangler's widow, who had two sisters
in the community in Russia. At one point she wanted to go with the
brothers and had already bought a wagon and a pair of horses. But in the
end it came to nothing and she remained in her home.
Andreas and Veit had to turn back alone, with nothing accomplished.
Their journey was not entirely fruitless, however, for they were given a
number of valuable books, particularly a copy of our first chronicle,
several old Zurich Bibles, and other books as well. The widow let the
brothers have the wagon and pair of horses. These proved very useful for
transporting the books on the homeward journey.

On the way, Andreas and Veit visited the Mennonites near Lemberg in
Galicia, whom we had known through correspondence for some years.
They had come from the Palatinate into imperial Poland and had settled as
colonists in a wild, uncultivated district. Their ministers were Jakob
Müller and Jakob Bergthold, as well as Joseph Mundlein, who had settled
in Falkenstein with a few families.
Our brothers talked over all articles of faith with them, and except for
their practice of foot washing, we were very close to each other. Then Veit
and Andreas returned to the community in Russia, bringing writings from
the ministers of the Mennonite congregations.
They also brought with them a German woman, Hanna With, and her
daughter. Hanna was a native of Danzig in Prussia. She united with the
church and was baptized on confession of her faith.
***************

1794 Elder Joseph Kuhr fell asleep/Johannes Waldner
entrusted with church
At seven o'clock in the evening of May 2, 1794, dear brother Joseph
Kuhr, Elder and leader of the whole church, fell asleep in the Lord with a
peaceful heart. Already on April 9 he had spoken his farewell words of
warning and encouragement to the assembled elders, and had taken leave
of the whole church community with heartfelt thanks for all the kindness
shown to him. He was eighty years old and had been a servant of the Word
for forty-six years. The care of the whole church had been entrusted to him
for fifteen years.
An account is given earlier in this book of his sufferings for his faith
in Christ during the persecution in Alwinz and while he lay bound in
prison.
After his death we continued in earnest prayer and supplication to
God that he might once again provide us with a faithful shepherd and

Elder.
On May 7, all brothers in the church (except those who were single)
gathered for the election. By unanimous testimony, Johannes Waldner was
asked to bear the burden of this position and was entrusted with the care of
the church. The brother found it too hard to accept, for he believed himself
too weak and unsuited for the task. In tears he begged the brothers to spare
him this burden if it were possible. But the brothers encouraged him,
telling him that God would be his strength and support, for the choice
could not be altered, and it was his duty to be obedient. Then at last he
consented to devote himself wholeheartedly to the task and begged the
brothers to bear patiently with his weakness and to intercede for him
before God. Brother Andreas Wurz reported all this to the church meeting,
and they interceded for him.
At ten o'clock at night on June 21, 1794, a fire broke out on our
neighbors' property. We heard that it had been started out of malice. The
houses and barns on two farms were burned to the ground. A strong wind
was blowing straight toward our houses, carrying sparks on to the thatched
roofs, and our buildings could very easily have gone up in flames, too, if
God Almighty had not given us his merciful protection. The straw thatch
was very hot and dry from the sun. The brothers spared no efforts to fight
the fire; they set up ladders and climbed on to the roofs with wet cloths,
and as soon as a spark fell, they extinguished it. Some of the sisters helped
the brothers to carry water. So this time, although the buildings had
appeared to be in great danger, the church community of the Lord suffered
no damage. Praise to our loving Father for ever more! May he continue to
protect the community from fire!
***************

1795 Second census
In March 1795, the registration reported in 1783 was brought up to
date. The count's officials came to our house with the old list; they crossed

out the names of those who had died in the intervening years and added
those who had been born. The elders were very uneasy about it. At this
time, we heard from various nobles that if anyone was registered twice, he
would be reckoned more or less as a serf.
Two brothers were sent to the count at Taschan, with a letter to
explain the brotherhood's fears that we or our descendants would lose our
freedom if we were registered again and again, and that as time went on
we would be reduced to servitude and slavery. This offended the count,
who flew into a rage and wanted the brothers to tell him then and there
who had spread such rumors. The brothers, unwilling to bring anyone into
difficulties, evaded the question as best they might by saying they could
not give names because the people were strangers to them. They begged
the count to pardon the brotherhood. At long last, he was appeased and let
the community have a short written statement on the point, signed by his
own hand. It ran as follows:
The community may be fully at peace about the false rumors of
danger to their personal freedom, inasmuch as the laws of the Russian
government are fixed and clear, and these state the conditions under which
every alien is able to leave the Russian Empire.
This reassured the brotherhood.
***************

1795 Brothers traveled to Sabatisch/Lemberg Mennonites
unhappy outcome
Members with relatives and friends at Sabatisch in Hungary
continued pleading for another visit to be made there. A journey was
decided and two brothers, Andreas Waleman and Tobias Bolman, set out
on May 20, 1795.
The visit turned out very differently than had been hoped. They
arrived by night at the house of Mathies Dangler's widow, who the

previous time had wanted to go to Russia with the brothers but had then
stayed behind. She told them what an uproar had occurred after the
brothers' departure. The Roman Catholic priest had them pursued as far as
Lemberg, about 450 miles. If they had caught brother Veit Glanzer, he
would have been condemned to life imprisonment, and brother Andreas
Waleman would have been drafted as a soldier. Several people at Sabatisch
had been obliged to swear that they had not been in contact with the
brothers and knew nothing about them. She begged them to leave at once
to avoid any more trouble on their account. The brotherhood should not
send any more members to visit the unfaithful brothers and sisters, for
many were determined to inform on them and betray them the moment
anything was heard about them.
On hearing this report the brothers lost all courage and hope for their
mission. As it was not advisable to stay longer, they left the same night.
Brother Tobias went as far as his mother's house, where his brothers
were living, too, but he dared not go in for fear they would turn traitor and
inform against him. So he and Andreas Waleman had to start home after a
fruitless journey.
They again stayed with the Mennonites in Lemberg and had further
talks with them. These Mennonites had never heard of community of
goods, nor of a church practicing it. They praised it highly and wanted to
adopt it, but they did not sufficiently consider how and why such a life is
lived, as was shown by the unhappy outcome.
When the brothers told the community about the Lemberg
Mennonites, the brotherhood wrote to them, enclosing the ten points which
are read out before baptism to explain the commitment each person must
make on joining the church. We specially advised them to send two or
more members from their congregation to gain an idea of the structure and
daily I order of the community and the manner of life of the brothers a and
sisters; if these representatives became convinced that the life was given
by God, they could then take the next steps on the way their hearts told
them to follow. They promised to dog this.

In spring of the following year, on May 18, 1796, Jakob Müller and
Jakob Bergthold arrived at Vishenka. With them were three families who
had already sold their property and corn with all their household goods,
expecting to stay in the community. Jakob Müller, as the older minister,
had been sent by the 1796 whole congregation to inquire into points of
faith and make sure they were right. Jakob Bergthold was to look into the
economic situation and see whether there was enough to live on. Jakob
Müller presented us with their printed confession of faith, and we gave
them ours, so that they could find out about our basis and test it carefully.
Nothing in their confession of faith directly opposed ours, but they lacked
community of temporal goods. They acknowledged that community of
goods was right and wanted to accept it in practice. Agreement was also
found on confession of sins and on the incarnation of Christ, but the whole
matter was not explored thoroughly enough, as was proved later.
Having found agreement with us so far, the three families wanted to
be united with the church immediately. We advised against this, for we did
not think it wise or right to rush such an important matter. We carefully
explained to the ministers that the three families should test their decision
for a while, and that as soon as they were fully certain and had united with
the church, we would write to the ministers in Lemberg; until these
received our letter they should take no new step, but wait quietly. The
ministers were content with this suggestion. They stayed no longer than
thirteen or fourteen days, took leave of us, and returned home.
Johannes Zerger, Heinrich Müller, and Johann Schrag with their
wives and children remained in the community. Before long, however, we
began to hear that they were not very happy with us. The work was too
strenuous, the food too meager, and they had objections to this, that, and
the other as well. So the uniting was delayed.
The congregation near Lemberg in Poland was not willing to wait for
news that the three families had joined the church. One after another began
to sell his property, and in autumn of the same year another six families
made their way to the community in Russia, arriving safely on October 4.
The younger minister, Jakob Bergthold, was among them. When they

heard that the first arrivals were not yet united with us, their hearts sank,
but at first they hid their disappointment.
We accommodated them as well as we could with our limited
housing. We welcomed them and treated them and their children as we
would our own brothers and sisters. To prevent complaints, Jakob
Bergthold was allowed to preach, even though we were not yet united. But
as they had started this venture without a true basis and heartfelt
conviction, it was impossible for them to continue long, as soon became
evident.
They had been with us only a short time when they began to raise all
kinds of criticisms and to use these as reasons why they could not unite
with us. They said Jakob Müller had not gone into the matter carefully
enough and accused him, among other things, of selling people's souls.
They began to dispute about points of faith, especially the incarnation of
Christ and secret confession of sin. They found great difficulty in the third
question asked of candidates for baptism, which speaks of the intercession
of the believers as well as of the death of Christ. This, said Jakob
Bergthold, was a relic of popery and was exactly the same as Mary, help
us! They said it was also popery for anyone to have to confess his sins to
another. No man can forgive sin, they insisted. Only God can forgive. Even
if a man has committed murder, he can set it right quietly between God
and himself. Discipline in front of the congregation is only for obvious
and known sins. They gave us to understand that a great deal would have
to be changed if they were to unite with us. The present witness brothers
would all have to be removed from office and others chosen by the whole
brotherhood. The books and old writings from our forefathers and martyrs
for the faith would have to be packed away and only the Bible used, and so
on.
They criticized many other things, too: They did not find the
community as our brothers described it. There was nothing but arguing
and quarreling - no peace, brotherly love, and unity at all. Also, people
were far too greedy, serving mammon more by living in the community
than by having private property. They (the newcomers) had been deceived
by glib, cunning talk and cheated of their property.

So there were struggles and quarrels enough. To crown it all, when
minister Jakob Bergthold preached to the community, he began speaking
against the basis of the church and supporting his false arguments with
quotations from the Scriptures. Consequently, he was no longer allowed to
preach.
At this point the newcomers sent two of their men back to the
congregation to give a report on the community in Russia. It is easy to
imagine that little was said in its favor. Most blame fell on the community
and on Jakob Müller, who, according to their judgment, had not properly
fulfilled the task given to him.
After Jakob Müller heard these reports, he publicly rejected the
church community and reunited with the others. Previously, he had
declared before us all that he was convinced of the rightness of community
of goods - convinced not because of our testimony but from the plain
evidence he found for it on almost every page of Holy Scripture. Now,
however, he apologized in front of his congregation for having acted too
rashly and for going over to community too suddenly.
When this happened, all the others went back to Lemberg. There were
a few who had become part of the communal life and would have liked to
stay, but they were infected by the others' bad example, and apart from two
women they all left us in the spring.
At first it had looked as if these people were enthusiastic for the good
and that through uniting with them the church would be strengthened and
increased. But it was an unfruitful enthusiasm that brought only slander
and shame to the community. The same happened to the church of God in
Moravia. Great difficulties were caused by these so-called brotherhoods,
and our forefathers have warned us about them. This account, too, has
been written as a warning to those coming after us.
***************

1795 Count Rumiantsev dies/freedom loss feared

At the beginning of December, 1796, Count Rumiantsev died in
Taschan. As the community had lived quietly and peacefully on his estates
since 1770, they sent three brothers partly to show their respect and partly
to speak with the three young counts.
When the brothers arrived, the count was still lying in state. There
was great pomp and ceremony around the body. Several priests read day
and night from the Gospels.
Two of the young counts had hurriedly arrived from Petersburg, and
our brothers were able to speak with them. On the brotherhood's behalf,
they expressed our heartfelt gratitude for their father's kindness to us and
asked them to continue showing us similar kindness.
These young counts promised to treat us well: although their power
and authority did not equal their father's, they would do all they could to
protect us and would show us no less kindness than he had done. All the
brothers thanked them once again for their goodness to us.
After the funeral had taken place in Kiev, the counts divided their
father's property in thirds and cast lots for it. In this way, the community
came under the protection of Sergei Petrovitch von Rumiantsev as our
future manorial lord. Since he was a privy councilor at the imperial court
in Petersburg, he returned there before the brotherhood had found an
opportunity to renew the contract his father had made. The business was
delayed until the following September.
In that month and year, a representative of Prince Kuraki in
Petersburg arrived at Vishenka. He brought written order from Count
Rumiantsev that the administrators of the estate should show him all the
count's property. From what he said we gathered that Count Sergei
Petrovitch had exchanged estates with Prince Kurakin. We sent two
brothers to this representative to inquire how such an arrangement would
affect us. He said that we were counted in with the other peasants in
Vishenka and would also go to Prince Kurakin as part of the exchange.
When we showed him the contract, which granted us freedom to move
away if we no longer wished to stay, he said, Act at once. There is still
time before the sale or exchange is concluded.

In this situation, the community sent two brothers to Petersburg, first
to renew the contract with the young count, and second to obtain some
help from the czar if at all possible.
Brother Johannes Waldner and brother Christian Hofer were chosen
for this journey. After the community had met in prayer and taken heartfelt
leave of them, they set out in October. Twenty-four days later they arrived
safely in Petersburg. They were granted an interview with the count, gave
him a small gift, and in answer to his questions told him why they had
come. They explained that the community was eager to bring our affairs in
order with him, and wanted to renew the contract made with His Lordship,
the count's father. After studying the document, he would not ratify the
agreement his father had made with us.
I cannot do it, he said. I cannot send my Christian people to be
soldiers in your place. You are people with consciences and you should not
demand such a thing.
The brothers said, We demand no such thing. We are free of any
obligations of this kind. Our contract protects us from being drafted for
military service.
The count retorted, How can you say you are free? You have been
registered and have to pay head tax. The czar must decide what should be
done here.
After the brothers had spoken a second and third time with the count,
he finally sent them to the Senate to have a petition written out to present
to the czar. According to the count, the fact that we were registered and
had paid head tax meant that we were not exempt from military service.
As the brotherhood had not understood it in this way before, the petition
was mainly concerned with our request for this exemption, since military
service was against our faith and consciences. We expressed the wish to
receive privileges such as other foreign colonists enjoyed in his realm,
among them the Mennonites, who are closely related to us in faith.
Czar Paul I rejected our petition as follows:

Inasmuch as the petitioners belong to a propertied lord, they cannot
enjoy the same rights and privileges as settlers on state land. Therefore,
their plea cannot be granted, but they should continue to have the same
status as under the field marshal.
The brothers could not rest content with this rejection, for we were in
a worse case than before. Until now we had not been told explicitly that
the count was obliged to send recruits on behalf of the church community.
Now the nobles in the Senate had stated it quite plainly, and when the
count wanted to confirm the contract with the same terms as his father had
made, we found it contrary to our faith and consciences. The brothers
reached no agreement with the count but returned home empty-handed.
Our next step was to write to both counts and most humbly beg them
to put in a good word for us with the czar. Count Nicolai Petrovitch wrote
in reply that he would very gladly have done us this favor, but as the czar
had already declined to intervene in the case, any further appeal would be
pointless.
Letters were also written to the office set up by the Senate, the
Department of State Economy, Guardianship of Foreigners, and
Agriculture, but we received no answer.
Soon afterward, Count Sergei Petrovitch's steward arrived at
Vishenka in the Ukraine. He was responsible for all the count's estates and
his master had given him the task of reaching a settlement with us. We had
many talks with him, for he was eager to find some arrangement so that
we could stay longer; but we could not reach mutually acceptable terms.
Since 1778, we had paid the old count 150 rubles a year for ground rent,
head tax, and mail service. The young count wanted to add another 150
rubles, so that we would have to pay 300 rubles a year. The brotherhood
was against paying the money at all, because we now knew that the young
count was imposing it in place of recruiting us, and we could not support
war with a good conscience. After careful consideration we at last
consented to pay the money, but only as a conciliatory gesture for a short
time of respite, so that the count might have patience with us until our
case was decided by the czar.

For several years, the community had suffered great anxiety in
connection with freedom of conscience and person, especially thinking of
the coming generations. There were many consultations on these subjects
with other nobles and lords of estates who knew the laws and privileges of
the country. Most of them doubted if we could ever be free to leave the
count because the community had been on his land so many years, and its
members had twice been registered.
Heartfelt praise and thanksgiving to God alone for his fatherly
goodness! He has never forsaken his church, but in his mercy has always
helped us overcome our difficulties, also in these dark and anxious days.
He planned a different place as dwelling for his little children, whose trust
was wholly in him, and he made his preparations before we had even
thought that a move would come in question. The following events were
already paving the way.
***************

1796 More attempts for freedom of recruitment
In 1796, the administrator of crown lands in the Ukraine made an
offer for us to take on properties in the village of Wuditchta, for an annual
rent. As we were short of fields and meadows in Vishenka, we accepted the
offer gratefully.
Two to three years later the crown lands in the villages of Ibanko and
Radicheva' also came into our hands; these were afterwards given to us by
Czar Alexander I as the church's own property and a place for us to settle.
We will report about this later.
In April 1800, Count Sergei Petrovitch von Rumiantsev came in
person to visit his estate in Vishenka. He let his officials understand that
he was extremely displeased that no agreement had been concluded with
us. He wrote a letter to the church community, disclaiming all
responsibility for the registration which made us subject to recruitment,

since it had taken place in his father's time and not in his, and he
demanded that we help the village of Vishenka to support the recruits.
Once more, we wrote to the count that the whole brotherhood was
firmly decided that, for reasons of conscience, we could not and would not
comply, no matter what the consequences. We added a short note that if his
lordship the count was unable to obtain freedom of conscience for us from
the czar, we requested permission to move away unhindered, in
accordance with the contract of 1770, specifically point 9. We would then
approach the czar ourselves.
Several brothers took our letter to the count. When he had read it, he
suddenly changed face completely and made great promises to the
brotherhood that as soon as he returned from Germany he would try to
help us straighten out all the problems with the czar. The brotherhood was
satisfied and hoped he would keep his promises.
The count then left for Germany, returning to Petersburg in October.
When we saw no sign of his keeping his word, we wrote a reminder,
asking him to bear in mind what he had promised us. But the church
community was left with no answer and no help.
Now in 1789 and subsequent years, several thousand Mennonites had
come from Prussia into Russia with the gracious permission of Catherine
II. They settled on the banks of the Dnieper on the uninhabited steppes
south of Yekaterinoslav. Czar Paul I granted them a most generous charter
of privileges under the date September 6, 1800.' They were all allowed
freedom of belief as well as many other advantages. The czar also set up a
special office in the city of Yekaterinoslav to care for all colonies of
foreigners.
The manager of this office, a German named Johann Brigonzy, visited
the German colony near Bielmeschen during the winter. When he heard
about us, he visited our community at Vishenka. We explained the
community's circumstances and asked if he had good advice for us,
especially to ensure freedom for future generations. He thought it would
be better and safer for the community to be on state land. He promised to
do everything in his power to help us, and to send the community a copy

of the letter of privileges, together with written directions on how to
handle the matter. However, nothing came of it.
When Johann Brigonzy's promises came to nothing and no answer
arrived from His Lordship, the count, the elders held a meeting early in
1801 and decided to send out three brothers to see if they could find a
suitable place for the community on one of the czar's estates in the
Ukraine. Those chosen were brother Jakob Hofer, brother Andreas Kuhr,
and Jakob Walter.
The three went first to Chernigov and asked help of the deputy
governor. Since they were unable to find anything, they traveled on to
Kiev. Here, too, they were turned away with no prospects. They therefore
went via Kremenchug to Yekaterinoslav, where they approached the
German office, hoping to find a suitable site in the district. When the
brothers asked to interview the head of this office, he absolutely refused to
see them; the officials were afraid of offending Count Rumiantsev, for
they had heard that since his return from Germany, he was highly favored
by the czar. Through the kindness of good-hearted people, however, the
brothers received in German and Russian copies of the charter of
privileges mentioned above. If the community could enjoy the freedom of
conscience and other advantages promised here, they would be well
content.
After the brothers had returned home from their fruitless journey, the
whole church gathered in the fear of God to consider what should be done
next. Since no place could be found for them to settle, they came to the
unanimous decision to send two brothers to Petersburg to ask the czar for
freedom of conscience and also for the crown lands at Wuditchta and
Radicheva, which we already had on lease. Otherwise, there was no hope
of becoming free from the count. Brother Johannes Waldner and brother
Jakob Walter were chosen to make the journey. When their passes and all
other essentials were ready, and after heartfelt intercession had been made
for them, they took leave of the community and set out on February 19.
Arriving safe and well in Petersburg on March 9, they appeared before the
count and at once explained the reason for their journey.
***************

1796 Favor found in new czar
Three days later, on March 12, a great change came over the city of
Petersburg. Czar Paul I suffered a violent death, and his son Alexander I
was raised to the throne.
The count tried to persuade the brothers that this made it impossible
for them to pursue their business; they should go home and rest assured
that he would be doing his best for the community.
The two brothers no longer trusted the count's kind words and
promises. They put together a petition with a brief, clear statement of the
brotherhood's wishes and request, and on April 2, 1801, they had the
opportunity to present it to the czar. As a result, he ordered his chancellery
to investigate our case and judge it according to the law of the land.
The brothers had to wait seven weeks for an answer. During that time,
they prayed unceasingly to God in heaven; asking him to look in mercy on
the distress and urgent concern of his church and to incline the hearts of
the great and mighty to obey his divine will for the good of his people. For
apart from him we had neither hope nor comfort; no one was ready to take
our part, to give us any assurance or support, or to help our cause in any
way.
Fervent prayer to the same intent was made daily in the church
community.
Glory be to the Lord and honor to him alone, thousandfold praise and
thanksgiving to him that he graciously heard his children's prayer and
granted their request! The decision was made in favor of the church's
petition, and when the count received a letter from the procurator general
to ask him about it, he had no authority to raise objections to anything.
A decree was dictated and written in the procurator general's office
and sent to the czar, who signed and sealed it with his own hand. I include
the text below:

***************

1801 Decree of the Governing Senate
In ratification of the humble request for resettlement from the
Mennonites resident in the Province of the Ukraine, domiciled at
Vishenka, one of the estates belonging to His Excellency Count Sergei
Rumiantsev; in consideration of the said Mennonites' request to move and
settle on the crown lands they already hold on lease, also to receive the
same privileges as are granted to all other Mennonite settlers in Russia;
with due regard to the consent expressed by Count Sergei Rumiantsev,
whose father concluded a contract on this point with the Vishenka
Mennonites: we are pleased to command the Department of State
Economy, which has the guardianship for all foreign settlers throughout
Russia, to instruct these Mennonites to move to the crown lands for which
they apply, provided that the said lands have not been granted to some
other person. In the event that these lands are already assigned, the
petitioners are to receive sections of land from properties lying untended
or else available for lease in the Province of the Ukraine, allotment to be
made according to the Charter of Privileges' granted to the Novorosisk
Mennonites on September 6, 1800: each family to receive sixty-five
dessiatines (175 acres) for an annual payment of fifteen kopeks per
dessiatine to the crown treasury, and the land to be no longer available for
lease. *
Furthermore, we graciously extend to these Mennonites all the rights
and privileges, without restriction, which are granted to the Novorosisk
Mennonites by the aforementioned Charter of Privileges, except for the
years of exemption from all payments, not applicable in this case since the
settlers have already been many years in Russia. As the Department for
State Economy has an office in Novorosisk (now Yekaterinoslav) for the
care and supervision of local aliens, and this office is nearer and more
convenient, the Vishenka Mennonites are to be referred to this office for
the practical execution of the Senate's decree.

St. Petersburg
May 22, 1801
ALEXANDER I
(The original is signed by His Majesty's own imperial hand.)
***************

1801 Brothers thankful for being saved from serfdom
The decree, signed with his own hand by Alexander was filed away
by the Senate; Johannes Waldner and Jakob Walter received only a copy
from the department established by the Senate for State Economy,
Guardianship of Foreigners, and Agriculture. The two brothers were told
that they might now return home with God's blessing, and that the
department would set things in motion by writing on our behalf to the
Yekaterinoslav office and to the finance office at Chernigov. Perhaps the
director from Yekaterinoslav, Johann Brigonzy, would come himself to
hand over to us the lands we had requested in our petition.
With this, the brothers were sent on their way. They prepared for the
homeward journey, thanking God with all their hearts that they had made
such good progress. After they had taken leave of the count and other kind
friends and acquaintances, they set out on June 5. They traveled via
Moscow and with God's protection, arrived safe and sound at Vishenka on
June 29. The whole community welcomed them with joy, thanking God
that, in his mercy he had blessed the brothers' efforts and had protected
them from every danger on the long journey. They thanked God for
granting freedom of conscience once more, also for saving the church
from the serfdom which had threatened to entrap it. For as a result of
registration, the payment of head tax, and the decree of the previous czar,
the community had lost its freedom without realizing what was happening.
But now the czar had restored it to us.

Not long after the brothers' return, Director Brigonzy came from
Yekaterinoslav to the Vishenka community to help conclude our business.
He went with two brothers to the governor at Chernigov. There the
community was struck off the register and declared free people under the
crown, beginning from May 22, the date on which the czar signed the
decree.
A surveyor was sent to measure, record, and map every piece of
arable land, meadow, and wood scattered in strips and sections here and
there.
To simplify matters, a piece of rented land was left off the map and
another piece substituted, namely an area including the water mill on the
Jessmann brook, also woodland with spruce and birch, and more besides.
Due to this alteration our business could not be simply and swiftly
concluded. Johann Brigonzy had to send the map and detailed explanations
to the Senate at Petersburg to see if the authorities agreed. He then
returned to Yekaterinoslav.
***************

1802 The Move from Vishenka
At this Juncture, Count Sergei Rumiantsev came from Petersburg to
his estate at Vishenka. The brotherhood had asked him by letter and by
personal interview to let us live three years longer in our homes on his
property to give us time for building something in Radicheva. He
consented at first, but then changed his mind. From October 1801 to
March 1802, we received no decision from the Senate in Petersburg, and
while negotiations were delayed in this way, the count sent curt
instructions to his officials that we were to vacate his property within
three months. We were to take with us as much as we could, and in
accordance with the contract with his father, pay him a tenth of the capital
we had acquired.

This brought the community under considerable pressure; we were
not assured of our future dwelling place because we had first to wait for
the Senate's decision. In addition a mistake was made which cost us a
great deal of trouble. The finance office in Chernigov misunderstood a
letter from Johann Brigonzy and ordered the land already allotted to us the land we had previously rented - to be divided up among the Russian
peasants on crown lands. The division was begun immediately, and the
community twice received orders from the local court to vacate the land
we had on lease and to make not the slightest claim to it in future. We did
not know what was going on and whether the Senate granted us the piece
of land shown on the map.
The situation was reported to the office in Yekaterinoslav, because the
czar had entrusted the community to its care. Director Brigonzy wrote and
assured us that we would obtain possession of the properties marked for us
on the plan, that our anxiety was groundless, and that all we needed to do
was wait patiently for a decision.
In these circumstances we began on March 20 to take down the
wooden buildings in Vishenka and transport them to our new home. Here,
however, we found people living on the property, some of whom had
already been given the holdings marked on the map as ours, and they were
ready to use violence to prevent our entry. The whole undertaking seemed
very strange and irregular, and we did not have the courage to risk the
transfer and start building until we received a decision. At last, on May 10,
it arrived from the Senate in Petersburg:
Everything allotted to us on the plan was to be handed over to us
without exception. In addition, a gift of 2,500 pieces of lumber was made
to the community by the crown, to be used for new buildings.
After this, we had the confidence to put our hands to work with a will
and made every effort to transport all we could before the date set by the
count. We satisfied his officials, paying cash, all kinds of grain, and farm
animals to a tenth of the value of our acquired property. On June 15, the
last brothers and sisters moved from Vishenka.

Three solidly built brick houses and a beautiful, well tended orchard
were left behind and we received nothing for them. But the count kindly
permitted us to harvest and take all our winter corn after the date fixed for
our removal.
The foregoing is a short but accurate description of how we gained
the freedom to leave the count's property and settle on crown lands.
Our stay in Vishenka lasted thirty-two years, less 36 days. During this
time many brothers, sisters, and children fell asleep in the Lord, and 172
people lie buried there.

Here ends the account of our church history written by
JOHANNES WALDNER.
***************

1783 Report by Heinrich Donner on Vishenka
Given in 1783 by the Mennonite minister and elder Heinrich Donneri
from Orlofferfelde in West Prussia, this account may give us some
interesting sidelights - although some repetition cannot be avoided - on the
time the brothers spent at Vishenka. Donner's account is as follows: *
In 1780, a man named Mathies Hofer came to Ellerwald and stayed
with Gerhard Wiebe, the church elder at Elbing. This man reported that
there is an Anabaptist community in Russia. He himself had been a
member, but had separated from the brotherhood over disagreements on
minor points. Gerhard Wiebe wrote to the community and received
confirmation that this was the case. The correspondence led the
community to send, one of their ministers, Joseph Müller, and one of their
brothers, Christian Hofer, on a visit, and they arrived on foot at Elbing in
1783. From here they visited all the congregations in West Prussia. Joseph

Müller was thirty-two years old. On the fourth Sunday after Easter he
preached in our meetinghouse, taking as his text Eph. 10: 4-12. His high
German sounded somewhat strange but his preaching was truly scriptural
and edifying.
I received the following account from Joseph Müller's own lips, and
it shows that even in these troubled days the Lord protects souls that
persevere in their discipleship of Jesus in spite of all persecution....
[He then relates the story we already know of the Carinthians'
emigration to Transylvania and says that] Joseph Müller added: I should
also tell you that my father Joseph Müller died on the long, difficult
journey, before he could reach Transylvania. [In the church register of
births and deaths for Vishenka it is recorded, however, that he died on July
28, 1770, The report of on the journey from Wallachia to Russia, three
days before the Heinrich Donner arrival in Vishenka.] **
We hear further details about Joseph Kuhr: In 1758 persecution
started against the Anabaptist communities at Sabatisch, and at Alwinz in
Transylvania. In the Sabatisch community Zacharias Walter was Elder and
in the Alwinz community Märtl Roth was Elder, while Joseph Goor was
minister. This Goor, or Kuhr as some pronounce it, was a well-to-do man,
respected by the highest in the land. He had fine orchards and vineyards
which produced fruit of the highest quality. When members of the nobility
came to Alwinz and wanted to enjoy themselves, they visited Kuhr's
garden. The poor people, too, loved him for his kindness: he lent them
money without charging interest and helped them in all kinds of ways. ...
When the persecution began, everyone thought that Kuhr would be blinded
by his wealth and would recant. But the real story was quite different.
Müller described crossing the Transylvanian Alps on the flight to
Wallachia: Joseph Kuhr had arranged for a guide. He came to us at
sundown and said, 'We must get moving at once and go with the utmost
caution. We must take a dangerous route over the mountains, avoiding all
the usual paths and passes. We will have to go through thickets, climbing
and scrambling up steep rocky slopes.' We asked him if he could take us
another way, as this would be too much for our women and children. He
replied, 'The roads and bridges are all guarded; we cannot go by another

route.' Then he took our horses and his own and put our ailing sisters on
them. A blind man in our group had to be mounted on horseback, too. The
guide tied these riders to their: mounts both in front and behind so that
they would not slide off backwards when we went steeply uphill, or
forwards when the 1783 ground sloped sharply down again. With these
preparations we started on our way. First of all we had to cross a stream.
Many got very wet. At evening, we came to the Carpathian Mountains.
This range divides Hungary from Poland and extends into Transylvania. It
is high, with astonishing cliffs and chasms so deep it made one dizzy to
look into them. But our guide encouraged us to go on. ... It took us two
strenuous nights on foot to reach the crest. From here, our way was all
downhill and, as we were somewhat safer now, we risked traveling by
daylight. After three days we at last came out of the mountains into
Wallachia.
It is impossible to describe how hard and exhausting the journey was.
We had to climb such high, steep rocks that we were in continual fear of
one of our people making a false step and hurtling down to the bottom,
without any possibility of rescue. This happened to one of our horses,
which fell into the chasm and lay there. Soon we had to follow narrow
paths with the ground dropping to such awful depths on both sides that we
were seized with fear at the sight of them. It was all the more terrifying
because we needed to travel at night. No one dared make a sound. Our
guide ordered the women with young babies to have them continually at
the breast so that they would not cry; the dogs had to be muzzled. When
we crossed a road through the mountains our guide took a bunch of twigs
and swept our footprints away because he was afraid we might be pursued.
The greatest hardship on the flight was that we had almost no food.
We went four days without bread, as our small supply was needed for the
old people and mothers with babies. We tore strips of bark from the trees
and chewed them and ate herbs.
When we were there (in Wallachia) we came to a village called
Campina. A nobleman wanted to have us on his estate, but as the land was
poor and infertile, we went on to a place about five miles [8 km] from

Bucharest, where we lived for a time. The water was bad, however, so in
1769 we moved about ten miles [15 km] further to Presetschain.
To avoid the horrors of the Russian-Turkish war, we moved from
Moldavia on April 10, 1770, our group then numbering about sixty people.
With God's merciful help and guidance we came to the Ukraine, where we
were allowed to settle on Count Rumiantsev's property in his village of
Vishenka. Here we have built a community and are still living in peace and
tranquility. We traveled about 940 miles [1480 km] to reach this place.
Many animals died on the long trek, but the people all came through in
good health. The count proved a benevolent landlord and showed us great
kindness. May the Lord our God graciously reward him!
***************

1780 Account of the Community
We now have plenty to do weaving linen, making pottery, and milling
grain, for we have already built a mill and a smithy and have paid off the
sum advanced us by the count.
In regard to the religious practices of the Hutterian Brethren, baptism
and the Lord's Supper for example, these are essentially the same as with
the Prussian Mennonites. There is a slight difference in the outward
observances, but nothing affecting their true significance. Exclusion,
however, is used much more sharply among them than among our Prussian
Anabaptists or Mennonites. With the Hutterian Brethren it is exercised in
three degrees of severity. First, for small offenses the greeting of peace
and brotherly kiss is not given to the community member, for their
greeting is Peace be with you. Second, for somewhat more serious sins, he
is excluded from decision making. Third, for very serious sins, the
member is completely cut of from the brotherly life. He is not even
provided with daily bread unless he comes and promises to improve. If he
does this, he is given food but must live apart from the other brothers and
sisters.

Marriage is also arranged differently than with us. Any one who
wishes to marry must speak with the Elder, who show which partner
should be taken. Disregard of the Elder's direction is punished by the
community unless there is solid reason for rejecting the person. This is not
as strange as it would be for us, because they live in community of goods
and are equally rich. Such equality removes the greatest obstacle to
marrying and the source of so much vexation among us. They introduced
community of goods in accordance with Acts 4:32-37. The other
communities in Transylvania also practiced it in earlier times, but because
they were driven here and there by the many wars in the past century, they
settled in different places. Since their time in the village of Kreuz they
have maintained community of goods.
Now they have built a so-called church community in the village of
Vishenka and all live there, sharing income and expenditure. The Elder is
leader of the community; with the help of the teacher and older brothers,
he deals with any disorders that may arise.
The craftsmen bring their finished work to the appointed overseer,
who sells their products and hands over the money to the Elder. There is an
overseer in charge of all work on 'the land and another in charge of the
mill they have built. The women have their own work of spinning,
knitting, and sewing. In short, every one of them must work at something,
or else Paul's words will come into force against him: If a man will not
work, he should not eat. 2 Thessalonians 3:10
Each kind of work has its separate room, and the men are apart from
the women. All those who are able to do so gather for meals in the large
dining room where twelve sit at each table. Food is carried out to the
workers in the mill and on the fields. In the kitchen one sister is given the
oversight with several sisters as her helpers. When the day's work is done,
each man and wife goes to their room. The married people's rooms are on
the second floor of the houses.
When a mother expects a baby and the time of birth is approaching,
she is brought to a room arranged for the purpose. Here she remains in bed
for a week after the birth and receives help and care. When the mother is
well enough she moves into

a room with other nursing mothers. They are not permitted to work
and during this time receive better food, more suited to women in their
condition. They may not breast-feed their babies for more than eighteen
months, however. *
At this point the child is put in the care of a sister known as the
school sister or schoolmother. This sister, too, has a separate room for her
work with the children. ** Other sisters help her when needed. At evening,
they help undress the children and put them to bed. They watch over them
at night and take every care of them. The children stay here until they are
five years old. From this time on they are under the supervision of the
schoolteacher, who also has his own room for the work. He teaches the
children reading, writing, etc. Here they are shown the way of true
Christianity, and the Holy Scriptures are taught and explained to them in a
manner suited to their tender understanding. The growing children remain
under the schoolteacher until they are twelve years old. At this age each
can start learning a trade which interests him.
Every day at five in the afternoon the community gathers for a prayer
meeting. The Elder reads a short exhortation to heartfelt prayer and then
prays together with the community, speaking aloud to God of particular
concerns. The minister who is preaching prays aloud before and after the
teaching, too, as we saw and heard with Joseph Müller when he preached
here.
Legal disputes and lawsuits are unknown among them. That is why
Joseph Müller, on hearing us use the expression 'lawsuit,' asked me what
kind of word this was, and what it meant. When it was explained to him
and he was asked if they never had disputes which needed to be decided by
a legal verdict, he told me, No, because 'mine and thine' no longer exist
nor have any place among us, and so such disputes do not arise. If
something occurs we settle it ourselves in accordance with the teaching in
1 Corinthians 6:1-6. So we have nothing to do with magistrates except for
paying our taxes. Any brother who went to the magistrates asking to have
his rights protected would no longer be considered a member of our
church.
***************

1802-1842 In Radicheva
As already recorded, in May 1802 the final payment was made to
satisfy the count's claims according to the contract. On June 15, the last
brothers and sisters left Vishenka. With trust in God, the people set
joyfully and confidently to work, building up a new community at
Radicheva, the place allotted by the government and situated on the River
Desna about 10 miles [16 km] from Vishenka. Bricks were fired and lime
burned for the purpose and soon five brick buildings and a number of
wooden ones were erected. The community buildings formed a square
measuring 490 feet each way, with a large entrance gate which was locked
and watched at night. The workshops for the different trades were on the
ground floor. On the upper story every family had a small room called
their little place, with a bed, a table, and two chairs.
Everything was arranged as the wonderful, heart-warming task of
community life requires. Our forefathers compared it to a hive of bees.
Two schools, for the older and the younger children respectively, each with
classrooms, were built on the old, well-proved plan, and workrooms were
soon set up for weaving, pottery, tailoring, shoemaking, turning,
hatmaking, tanning, spinning, and broom binding. A smithy, a washhouse,
and a bakery were finished, as well as a dining room and a mothers' and
babies' room. All this, as can be imagined, cost a great deal of hard work
and sweat, but it was done with joy and enthusiasm and the people thanked
God with all their hearts for his fatherly help and faithful love.
The work departments were staffed with loyal, trustworthy brothers
and sisters, who oversaw the work and made sure all was done in a good
and orderly way. It was also their duty to see that on Sundays and holidays
their young apprentices went to the teaching and prayer and read the Bible
in the afternoons. They did not read newspapers or worldly books, which
distract from what is good. Instead they said, Let's be rid of such things, as
Acts 19:19 teaches. They preferred to apply themselves to the Word of
God and the writings which our beloved forefathers wrote to the church

from prison, when they were in bonds, suffering pain and great trouble for
the sake of Jesus' name.
The brothers kept an account of income and expenditure just as their
forefathers had done, and handed in the cash to the steward every two
weeks.
Ten miles [16 km] away, on a river called the Jessman, they had a
water mill which the government allowed them to run for their own profit.
They had a big windmill, too, which they themselves had built on the hill
on our place, for they were experienced in such undertakings.
In addition, they had rented a piece of land from the government, and
as long as honest and dedicated brothers were responsible for the work, it
brought a good income to the community.
They also owned a distillery in the fir wood on the other side of the
Desna, where there was a fine big fish pond, connected to the river and
well-stocked with fish. It had been given them by the government, which
was very favorable to our brothers because of the honesty and
dependability found among them, and pleased with the wonderful way the
community life was built up. Later on, however, this became despised, and
many in the next generation even dared to speak against it.
Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen was the Elder and leader of the church.
His helper in the service of the Word was Andreas Wurz, who also
continued as a faithful teacher in the school until his end. He taught the
children reading, writing, arithmetic, and how to sing and pray, for he had
a wonderful gift for such work.
The steward was Joseph Kleinsasser. He was one of the brothers from
Carinthia and served the church lovingly and faithfully in this capacity for
thirty-four years. After his death his helper, Jakob Hofer, commonly
known as Hofer Jakob, was elected as steward by the whole church. The
church community was in a good state both inwardly and outwardly. The
servants of the Gospel were zealous in their preaching and admonition.
When evil came in and wrong was committed, they punished it in
accordance with Paul's instructions. They held a daily meeting for prayer:

a few verses were sung, a short address was given, and a prayer was
spoken. The servant of the Word closed the meeting with a blessing.
The brothers and sisters put their best into the work they were asked
to do in the community, for a childlike obedience ruled among them, and
everything worked together as beautifully as in the mechanism of a clock.
A report about the community at Radicheva says: There were 44
families in the community with a total of 99 men and boys, and 103
women and children. Their share of land was reckoned at 2,860 dessiatines
[about 7,700 acres], but actually they received no more than 753
dessiatines [about 2,033 acres], since the brotherhood itself felt that this
area was sufficient 'because of its fertility and the favorable position about
17 miles [27 km] from the capital and on both sides of the Desna.' With
the help of a government loan of 4,000 rubles, they built their communal
farm on the right-hand side of the river. On this side they had 463
dessiatines [1,250 acres], mostly agricultural land with a little woodland
and some hay meadows. The other 312 dessiatines [842 acres], on the left
bank of the Desna, were mainly woodland and meadow. *
Another report says: An additional five large, solidly constructed
brick houses were built. There were two strongly vaulted cellars under
them. **
When one of the women had a baby and the attic room was too cold,
she went down with her child to sleep in the mothers' and babies' room.
Every brother capable of practicing a trade had to learn one. Each year one
brother had to absent himself from his trade to do his turn as stable hand.
The community in Radicheva did not build from its own resources,
but borrowed a bank advance of 4,000 rubles from the state. This money
had to be paid back after ten years. Twelve brothers signed the note of
hand. When the note of hand fell due, nearly all the signatory brothers had
died.
***************

Johann Wigand; Authentic Account of the Hutterian
brothers in the Ukraine
Johann Wigand, an elder of the Moravian Brethren at Sarepta on the
Volga describe the Hutterites during these years in his travel journal of
1802: * We now had to cross the Desna, which cost us many difficulties
and dangers before we could reach Count Rumiantsev's estate at Vishenka,
where the Hutterian Brethren used to live. They moved from here in the
past summer, however. We lodged next to the place they built here twentyfour years ago and occupied until last July. Our hosts, a clean, well-to-do
Russian family, still speak with great affection of the Hutterian Brethren,
their former neighbors, particularly of the elder, Christian Hofer. We took
a guide for finding Radicheva, the place where the brothers are now living.
After we had made our way up and down a number of gullies and hills, we
came to the church community - as it is called - at Radicheva.
Since we did not know where we should go, we stopped at the
schoolhouse. The second minister, Andreas Wurz, told us afterwards that
he immediately thought, 'That must be Wigand from Sarepta.' The present
first minister, Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen, at once came open-armed to
greet us. The other minister, Christian Hofer, who had known me in St.
Petersburg, was no longer living. We were given lodging in Peter Hofer
and Peter Janzen's house and soon began to look around the place.
These brothers, known as Hutterian, settled in Hungary more than a
hundred years ago. (Here follow seven lines of historical survey.) In 1770,
they were plundered and driven apart by the Turks, and when they had
gathered together again they were raided and abused by the Albanians. You
can still see among them men who were branded with red-hot horseshoes.
They took refuge in the woods and remained there the whole winter.
In the following spring, they appealed for help to the general
commanding the Russian army, and he sent them on to the field marshal,
Count Rumiantsev. Thinking that they were members of our brotherhood,
the count received them very kindly and, with clearly arranged conditions,
allowed them to settle on his estate in Vishenka on the Desna. The most
important stipulations were exemption from military service and from

payment of war taxes, because these were completely against their
consciences; and their obligation to pay a tithe of their gains if they should
move away.
They lived peacefully on his estate until the death of the field
marshal, who had been like a father to them. His heirs, however,
demanded that they at least pay money for recruits, and the brothers could
not agree to this. They therefore appealed to Paul I, asking to be provided
with state land. The Procurator General at that time, Prince Kurakin,
wanted to protect the interests of the Rumiantsev counts, and he obtained
an imperial resolution by which the brothers were to remain on the
Rumiantsev estates on the same clear conditions as in the old count's time.
On the accession of Alexander I [1801], the brothers renewed their
request to be moved to state land. Without anyone to favor or represent
their case, and with a formidable opponent working against them, they
were nonetheless granted their request and received the land in the most
advantageous way. At the village of Radichevo or Raditchy on state
property in the northern Ukraine, they were allotted 700 dessiatines of
land [1,890 acres] on the right bank of the Desna, a navigable river full of
fish. The property had formerly belonged to a monastery and consisted of
sixty small parcels of land scattered between other holdings. It included
117 dessiatines [about 316 acres] of the most beautiful pine forest. For this
extremely fertile land, containing woods, hay meadows, fisheries, a
vegetable garden, orchard, and mills, they had to pay the low sum of
twenty-five kopeks a dessiatine [about ten kopeks an acre], whereas
previously it had brought in double that sum to the government. Such was
God's care for the community.
In May of this year 1802, they left Vishenka, where they had lived for
twenty-four [actually thirty-two] years, and in July they started to build
their new place. In November, four months later, we found eighteen or
nineteen houses already standing and ready for occupancy, without the
brothers having accepted any advances apart from two thousand logs,
lumber for building which had been given them by the state.
To the right of the entry, at the foot of a gently sloping rise planted
with a beautiful orchard, there is a not unattractive stone house thatched

with straw. In this house is a dining room spacious enough for the
community to have meals; it is used at the moment as a meeting room as
well. There is also the common kitchen, where the cooking is done by a
permanent cook and two helpers who work on alternate days. Next to the
kitchen are a number of storerooms with a vaulted cellar underneath. We
found a smithy with an adjacent coal shed, a tannery with a place for
storing leather, a shoemaker's shop, a distillery with three stills, and the
laundry next to a well that is more than forty feet deep. There is also the
common bakery, where one sister with a different helper each day bakes a
medium-dark type of bread for all the household. There is a temporary
weaving shop and several other interim buildings. Finally there is the first
minister's house, which consists of one good-sized room. On the left side
of the enclosed square of land are two rooms where eighteen mothers and
their babies are living at present. Food is brought to them from the
communal kitchen. A mother stays here until her child is one-and-a-half
years old. **
At the far end are school houses, one for younger and one for older
children. The older pupils of both sexes are taught together, though with
boys on one side and girls on the other. Under the careful supervision of
the head teacher, his wife, and a few single brothers and sisters, they are
instructed in reading, writing, and Christian knowledge, as well as
knitting, spinning, and sewing, until they are grown up, or until they are
baptized.
One is not aware of any of the undesirable effects that might be
feared from such a system. One notices, however, that these children - who
in general are quiet rather than wild and noisy, yet at the same time free
and natural - have nonetheless something unbroken and stubborn, one
might almost say an unbaptized streak in them.
Next to the schoolhouses are a carpenter's workshop and a few farm
buildings. A house for sisters is being built, with a workplace for single,
married, and widowed sisters who are not occupied elsewhere. This is
possible, even appropriate, because work is so arranged here that no
woman runs her own household. She and her husband and children have all
necessities provided. In return for such care, each one devotes all she can

to the common work. When all the buildings are finished a number of the
men will be occupied in a similar manner in the workshops and have their
bedrooms nearby, but the single men will sleep in a house for brothers.
Alongside the street, a pottery, a hatmaker's shop, and a dyer's shop will
form the fourth side of the square. Besides all these buildings there are to
be barns for the animals and sheds for storing fruit.
At midday our host, Minister Waldner, was brought food from the
communal table. Served in simple dishes he had made himself, it was
clean, plentiful, appetizing, and satisfying. After enjoying the meal with
him, we had a blessed time of conversation together. The hours he was
away at his work, I spent in acquainting myself with their new history of
the past century which Waldner has put together to make a good
manuscript. I knew the barest facts of their earlier history from my contact
with them in St. Petersburg.
The signs of God's merciful protection for this faithful-hearted little
flock are as obvious as their faults and failures, which have often resulted
from lack of the necessary wisdom and from too great strictness. To give
an example: when they were in Hungary, one of their ministers was
imprisoned. For a few years he diligently performed the work allotted to
him. But gradually the thought took possession of him: Should I, as a child
of God, work for these ungodly people and so support them in their sins?
His answer was, No! As a result he was punished until he perished from
hunger and beatings.
When they were cruelly persecuted the members did not easily deny
their church; nearly all of them held true in spite of threats, imprisonment,
and daily beating. Indeed, they willingly submitted to death. Had one of
them done the opposite, however, he would have been cast out as an
apostate. There is no mercy, no regard for human weakness, and not even
the bitterest tears of repentance can avail to restore him to membership in
the church. ***
Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen, who is well-acquainted with the beliefs
and history of the Moravian Brethren, is far more liberal in outlook than
his congregation.

He inquired very earnestly about our pastoral care, and I explained to
him that we turn to the precious merits of Jesus as the real and practical
source of all healing for body and soul, and to the power of his blood, shed
for our sakes, as the one foundation for true and saving faith. Peter Hofer
and Peter Janzen's hunger for this instruction could not be satisfied.
Deeply moved, he assured us that their church also regards and uses
Christ's merits as the only source of righteousness and salvation. But he
sighed with grief as he regretted that they are a long way from turning to
the true life given by God and that this lack may be hard to remedy.
The difficulty is that they are strongly suspicious of new ways,
however obvious a help these may offer, and sense from far off anything
which may have such a tendency. This is why the same prayer is
unfailingly repeated each day. This is why there is no church festival of
thanksgiving and praise for good they have received, although at heart
they keenly feel the need of it. This is why there is no variation in their
meetings, which are held once each day and two or three times on Sunday
without any alteration in form or content. This is why the brothers' and
sisters' clothing strictly conforms to the fashions of the sixteenth century.
This exaggerated aversion to everything new and contemporary is due to
their early separation from the old Moravian church; **** since then, false
teachers have been continually at work among them, dividing and
fragmenting this once numerous branch of the church right down to the
present day, until only a small handful is left. Even in Vishenka scarcely
ten years ago one of their number (Mathies Hofer) began to say that their
prayer should become more communal. He asserted this with zeal and
emphasis. He met with opposition and grew all the more urgent and
forceful. The agitation in the church increased. Then he went still further.
He tried to convince them that personal prayer was sinful and loathsome
and should be rejected as a work of Satan. The community gathered and
discussed the question. Fortunately, the majority saw the matter more
clearly. The man was excluded and sent away - though not without danger
of a new division, which would have meant the end of the community.
Where heads are confused and hearts so zealous, the smallest spark
can start a conflagration which destroys everything. For this reason I was
not asked to speak to the congregation.

At evening, as twilight was falling and had made further work
impossible, a couple of school boys went to every dwelling to announce,
'It is time for prayer.' Our host went into the meeting room and sat down
behind a table, between the second minister and the housefather or church
Elder. We were given places next to them. The brothers and sisters sat on
two rows of benches. The schoolchildren were closest to the minister's
table. A few verses were sung from a Protestant hymnbook in common use
in Transylvania, the minister first reading out the lines. After the singing,
Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen stood up and spoke about love. His address
accorded with Scripture and was to the point. A pity that it was rendered
unpleasant to the unaccustomed ear by the habit of drawing out each
syllable, or some syllables, making the sound monotonous! After this
short talk, the daily church prayer, good in itself, was spoken aloud by the
minister. The meeting finished with a song, read out beforehand by the
second minister. Supper followed immediately. After the meal, the
brothers gathered in our room. Among, them were the second minister,
Andreas Wurz; the householder; Joseph Kleinsasser, a worthy old man,
with eyes beaming cheerfully between his white hair and the beard on his
rosy cheeks; his helper, Jakob Hofer, brother of my deceased friend
Christian Hofer; Paul Glanzer, a lively old man; and Christian Waldner,
Johannes' son, a witness brother, as they term him.
They all expressed their joy in our visit. We talked from heart to
heart, returning again and again to the one vital concern. Among other
subjects, we spoke a good deal about spreading the kingdom of God.
Waldner had gained some idea of the present state of this work from our
books and newsletters, whereas the others had the simple belief that the
kingdom of God was exclusively confined to Radicheva. When I told them
of the mission work carried out by the Moravian Brethren and even
extending to England, it was something quite new, quite unexpected for
them, but it obviously warmed their hearts and made them happy. Near
midnight we parted and went to rest.
Apart from having profitable talks, I spent the following day in
reading to the end of their recent history. I read through their writings,
which are mostly good, complete, letter-perfect manuscripts; also their
printed songbook, which they are not going to use again until they have

built their meetinghouse. Mediocre as this songbook is, it is certainly
preferable to the written one they are now using. Among their books I saw
a martyrology which showed, according to the different provinces and
sizable cities in the whole of Europe, how many children of God had
sealed the truth with their blood. At first I thought the numbers
exaggerated, but when I found Waldensians, Wycliffites, Brethren,
Anabaptists, and many others included, I could not find much fault with it.
In the evening we were again called to the prayer meeting, which
Andreas Wurz held in the way already described. He gave a rather
unsatisfactory talk on faith, and, in addition to the habit I mentioned with
reference to Waldner, he also began his sentences in the highest falsetto
voice and suddenly changed to the tone used in normal conversation.
After the meeting, the majority of brothers again came to our room.
Part of the time we continued the previous day's conversation, part of the
time we spoke of the way they run their community and of practical
affairs. They have a large number of the basic trades, and these produce
goods of almost perfect quality but without any ornamentation. They badly
need a doctor. After a number of fruitless attempts to train one from
among their own young people, they finally sent Christian Hofer's son as
pupil to Count Rumiantsev's private doctor. ***** When this young man
was quite far on in his studies, he began to desert the simple customs of
his parents. He dressed in the German fashion and. shaved off his beard.
The brothers saw what was happening, though with reluctance. Later, he
was so unfaithful to their community principles that they had to hand him
over to the district magistrates, and this brought his good father to the
grave. At present the two ministers take care of any medical needs with
the help of a book.
Every member of the community knows more than one trade, so they
never come into difficulties if one of their occupations is not needed for a
time. Waldner was a carpenter as well as a weaver, and Andreas Wurz a
farmer, potter, and gardener.
In the afternoon, I visited the second minister, Andreas Wurz, in his
little room. He is a frail, not noticeably gifted man, but one is drawn to
respect and honor him for his faithful service in his exacting task in the

school, for his genuine piety simplicity of heart, and devotion to Jesus our
Savior. He cannot prevent the tears filling his eyes when he speaks of Jesus
as the Lamb of God, who bore our sins. He assured us that each day he
earnestly commends the hearts of his schoolchildren to the Savior. Our
conversation will remain unforgettable for us both.
Waldner then took me to the sisters' house, where everyone received
me with much love. After several conversations that were more important,
for instance on the complete surrender of our own wills to the will of the
Lord, a number of more trivial questions were put to me. An old mother
asked how we conduct Marriages; another whether our sisters wear high
heels; a third, who saw that my outdoor shoes were tied with laces,
whether that was the custom among us. As I was leaving, they all begged
me again and again to greet our sisters in Sarepta.
I next went to look at various community work departments. The
kitchen, dining room, and bakery, have already been mentioned. Now I saw
the clothing department in operation. The steward purchases the linen,
wool, thread, and so on with money from the common purse and gives the
necessary materials to the sister in charge of the work. This sister knows
how many adults, growing boys and girls, and little children require socks,
skirts, shirts, and other garments, and she sees that these are provided,
setting her various helpers to mend or make them. The tailor's department
works in cooperation with her. Any community member who needs
clothing will tell the housefather, minister, or head of the department, and
will receive it ready for wear. If a garment needs only to be mended, it is
taken away and replaced by an already mended article which belonged to
someone of the same size. The one exception is the minister's long coat,
because this is black, and the other brothers usually wear blue.
In general, their costume is as follows: the men do not cut their
beards; they wear a round hat and a tunic which is similar to what the
Russians wear, except that it has fewer pleats and is not double-breasted; it
is usually blue and has hooks instead of buttons. Men and women alike do
not use buckles, ribbons, buttons, or anything they can possibly manage
without. They limit themselves to what is absolutely necessary. For the
same reason, they do not use sugar, coffee, tea, tobacco, etc.

The women's costume is a black woolen bonnet with plain linen
strings, a coarse white shawl to tie over it in cold weather, a cloth jacket,
and a homespun dress with an apron of plain linen.
Before we left this remarkable place, Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen
asked us to take their most heartfelt greetings to the congregation in
Sarepta, and repeatedly expressed their brotherhood's gratitude for our
visit, adding that they would have willingly paid the expenses of our
journey if only they had had the means.
The ministers more than once spoke with great concern about how
little sign there was of anyone to succeed them in their office and how
remote and cut off their community was. They also spoke of forming
closer connections with the Moravian Brethren (Unitas Fratrum). As far as
the Hutterian Brethren are known, many people - even the State - regard
them as Mennonites, but Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen stated most
distinctly that he is convinced they have a still older and closer connection
with our church. I never went further into this question with them, but only
stressed that the one essential is to be truly members of Christ, and I
simply commended our church to their brotherly love and intercession.
1808 Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen's friendship with Wigand
continued till the latter's death in 1808, and he maintained contact with the
Moravians for several years afterward. He wrote the following letter in
Radicheva on October 25, 1808 to C. F. Gregor of, the Moravian Brethren
at Sarepta:
***************

1808 Letter from Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen to the
Moravian Brethren
Beloved friend and brother in Jesus Christ our Lord, your loving and
Christian letter of August 31 did not reach me,

Letter from until October 15, when it arrived with the mail from
Novgorod-Severski. It was a great pleasure to receive a letter from you
once more since I had heard nothing for a long while. But for a time its
contents saddened me as I read of the passing away in faith of my dear and
valued friend Johann Wigand, whom I have come to know face to face in a
heartfelt relationship.
I am sorry with all my heart that this excellent man, who loved God
so deeply, had to suffer such a painful and long, drawn-out sickness. I was
comforted, however, as I considered that the dear Savior will turn this
suffering into overflowing comfort and joy, for 'the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be
revealed in us.' I quoted for him:

How quietly thou sleepest,
Thy trials at an end;
In perfect peach thou restest
In thy Redeemer's hand.
Thou under earth's dark cover
Art hidden from our eyes.
Thy course on earth is over.
Thy lot is blessedness.

Although we expressed differing views in our letters, this never
disturbed the love between us but rather strengthened it so that the
friendship we formed, the bond of love, undoubtedly bestowed by God,
will remain firm and unforgettable though he is now gone. I acquired my
knowledge of your church and its beliefs from the writings that he gave

me in St. Petersburg ... and they continue to be a blessing to my heart. The
great distance between our places prevents our having more contact, and
our acquaintance can be kept up only by letters.
With regard to our welfare, I must tell you, my dear friend, that our
heavenly Father still allows us to enjoy the blessings of peace under the
protection of the highest authorities, and we are still gathered together in
unity and community. Our outward circumstances are not of the best, but
neither can we complain of any great lack. During the summer several
people have suffered from long periods of sickness....
I know of nothing else to write to you this time. If any reason or
opportunity for your writing should arise, or if you would like to write to
us, please send me a short report - just a few lines - about what is
happening to the Scottish missionaries who are traveling through the
Caucasus Mountains to proclaim the Gospel, and what blessings and
progress attend other efforts to preach the Gospel among the heathen.
Although we are too poor to contribute to this wonderful work, I rejoice to
hear about it and take the greatest possible interest in it.
My helper in the service of the Gospel and all the older brothers send
their greetings and warmest love to you, your helpers, and all who love
Jesus, with the wish that God may perfect you and us in all good works
and in doing his will. The same wish also comes from me as I sign myself
your devoted friend and servant,
PETER HOFER AND PETER JANZEN,
Minister of the church in Radicheva near Novgorod-Severski
***************

1802 Official report on the Hutterites
1802-1818 Another account about Radicheva, based on official
reports by two Russian councilors of state, helps to complete the

on the Hutterites picture of communal life there: * Here (in
Radicheva), Councilor Kontenius saw 'for the first time a family of two
hundred; living together on one farm and under the stewardship of the
church.' He reports that in addition to working the land, the brotherhood
was occupied in making pottery. They marketed an considerable amount of
glazed ware and also practiced the following handicrafts: tanning, lockmaking, carpentry, turnery, blacksmithing, hatmaking, and weaving. The
fine linen made by the brotherhood was sold at 1 ruble, 10 kopeks for
about 3/4 m. and was 'in no way inferior to Dutch linen.' At that time, the
community was enlarging their orchards and intended to make a mulberry
plantation of 5,000 trees. They had already planted about 1000 two- and
three-year-old trees.
The members of the present brotherhood cannot, of course, take
credit for the centuries-long suffering and testing by martyrdom that their
forebears endured for the sake of their convictions, but they show their
beliefs by their actions. By common report, they are conspicuous 'for their
Christian virtues and unimpeachable morals in every respect.' Even in
1841 the governor of Chernigov confirmed that 'when the Radicheva
Mennonites lived in brotherhood like one family, they conducted their
affairs honestly and decently and lived quite prosperously.' He himself had
spoken with several merchants who had done business with them and who
'to this day cannot give high enough praise for the dependability of the
brothers' word and the punctuality with which they fulfilled whatever they
had promised.' It is clear, therefore, that in both moral and material
aspects their life met the standard necessary for them to thrive.
But in order to learn more about the structure and organization of the
Radicheva colony we will take the liberty of quoting some interesting
passages from a report that Assistant Councilor Bunin, Inspector of
Colonies for St. Petersburg, wrote to the Minister for the Interior. Bunin
was instructed to speak with the nobles in the Chernigov and other
administrative districts about the settlement of foreign colonists on their
land, and he visited the aforementioned colony on January 28 and 29,
1818. Bunin reports: 'The brotherhood's houses are situated on a piece of
land 490 feet square. It is surrounded by a fruit bush hedge with an
entrance gate. They regard themselves as one family. The building where

the members live and practice various handicrafts has six brick and two
wooden wings of one story, built rather low. There are several small houses
on the place as well. The roofs of the main building are high-pitched, and
corridors have been built through the attics with small cells, or rooms,
opening on either side. This is where the Mennonites' have their dwelling
quarters, each married couple with their own room. There are no stoves. In
each room there is a bed, a table, and two chairs. The couples use them
only for sleeping or for short stretches of time. **
Similar but larger rooms for sleep and rest are pro-vided for the
unmarried men from fifteen years old and upward, who have finished their
school studies and received baptism. There are twelve to sixteen men in
each room and a bed for every two of them. The older girls also have
separate sleeping: accommodation. In addition to the bedrooms there is
still enough space in the attic to dry the laundry, etc.
The government is already aware that these Mennonites have a
particular confession of faith, which they say is the apostolic faith. For
worship services they set aside a separate,'' room without any pictures of
saints or crucifixes. Here they meet on Sundays and church holidays and
also gather for prayer every evening before they go to supper. The service
is taken by the Elder, Waldner, and his two helpers. *** During the service
they sing appropriate songs, and the sisters are especially well taught in
singing.
The brothers' way of life appears to be humble and unassuming; they
are well-mannered, friendly, eager to do their duty, hospitable, and ready
to give any and every help.
Shortly before a baby is due in a family, the mother is brought into a
warm room for the delivery. There she and other mothers nurse their
children until the age of one and a half years. To help at the birth the
community has capable though untrained midwives. Once the child is
weaned, the mother rejoins her husband. The child is taken to another
room (furnished with beds and cradles) and brought up with other children
here until the age of four years. They are supervised by sisters chosen
from among the older widows in the community. Here also the children
have their meals, which are prepared in a special kitchen.

At four years old the children of both sexes are moved to another
room with similar teachers. Later, at seven years old, boys and girls are
separated. The girls are trained and taught by sisters, the boys entrusted to
a male teacher's guidance. From this time on, both sexes are taught
reading, writing, and religion. When their school years are over and they
are more mature, they are baptized and they move to the attic dormitories.
The mothers and fathers are not forbidden to come to their children
during free time or to take their children to their rooms. In general the
clothing is poor. All the children's practical needs are looked after by older
women, and the beds are made by the unmarried girls while the boys are in
class or at work. The young sisters take turns at the task. At dinner and
supper, married and unmarried people and the young people who are
already baptized gather in a room where men and women sit at separate
tables. The mealtime begins with a prayer. Dinner is at half past eleven,
and after dinner there is an hour's rest. The evening meal is at twilight.
In winter, they go to bed at nine o'clock and to work at five in the
morning. In both cases, various members in turn have the duty of telling
people when it is time for bed or for work. In summer, because of the
increased workload, the people get up earlier and go to bed later.
Visitors to the community cannot be anyone's personal guests. They
are the guests of the whole brotherhood, in whose name the Elder offers
them hospitality.
Bunin continues: 'In this way, the community lived and prospered in
peace from the time they settled here until 1817, honoring God and the
czar and stirring the admiration of their neighbors. Arable land and
meadows were fertile and productive. The brotherhood preferred, however,
to have them cultivated by hired laborers drawn from the neighboring
Ukrainians who received one to two hundred rubles for a year's pay. Cattle
raising was done on a large scale, using good Hungarian stock.
The brothers kept bees, too, but they were mainly occupied in their
own trades and crafts, including the cultivation of garden crops and silk
production. They owned two stills for making spirits, one on the right and
one on the left bank of the Desna with all the buildings necessary for work

and accommodation. These stills produced up to 61,500 liters annually. On
the Jessman river, some ten miles [16 km] from the settlement, the
brotherhood owned a mill with three sets of millstones. Felt hats - mostly
plain but some furred - were made in the community, and carpentry,
turnery, tailoring, weaving, pottery, blacksmithing and lock-making were
carried on as well, and produced no small quantity of goods for sale. There
was, in addition, a workshop for making winter wagons and summer
wagons, harrows, plows, cleaning machines, spinning wheels, etc., and a
tannery which provided sole-leather and Russian leather.
'All this goes to show that the brotherhood did not sit with their hands
idle in their laps, and that although they lived simply and without luxury,
they were nonetheless comfortably off.'
***************

1802-1811 Deaths through the years
As long as the world has existed, however, mankind has been in
bondage to death. As Sirach says, Like green leaves on a fine and verdant
tree which sheds some and puts forth others, so it is with men: some die
and others are born. So it was with the brotherhood.
Beloved and zealous old people as well as many other dear, faithful,
God-fearing brothers and sisters passed on one after another to their
eternal rest. They had had to endure great suffering in defense of faith and
truth for the sake of Jesus Christ, as has been described in this book. They
had been persecuted and fled over the mountains into Wallachia, where
God tested them through trouble and distress but mercifully helped them
surmount all difficulties.
Their names are recorded here:
On March 11, 1802, our dear brother, old Christian Hofer, fell asleep
in the Lord with a peaceful heart at the age of 53 years. His trade was
cabinet making. He had also built the windmill and ship-mill and for

twenty-five years had won respect for the faithful way he carried out his
responsibility for the cabinet making and milling, as well as making
clocks, at which he was highly skilled. He was a God-fearing man, able to
serve at many tasks.
In 1803, on April 26, brother Veit Glanzer fell asleep in 1803 the Lord
with a peaceful heart at the age of sixty-two years. He, too, was one of the
old brothers from Carinthia who had helped re-establish Christian
community at Kreuz and Stein in Transylvania. Known for his hard work,
he was assistant steward for some time. Later he tended the vegetable
garden and the bees for many years.
In 1807 at seven o'clock in the morning on January 30, dear brother
Joseph Kleinsasser, another of the old brothers from Carinthia, fell asleep
in the Lord with a peaceful heart. He had cared faithfully for the
community as steward for thirty-four years and carried out his service
honorably until his last day on earth. He was sixty-eight years old.
In 1810, on March 28, brother Johannes Stahl fell asleep in the Lord
at the age of 56. As a fourteen-year-old boy he had fled with his mother
from the persecution at Alwinz and had joined the community at Kreuz.
After his father's death, he was responsible for the pottery for many years.
In 1810 at ten o'clock in the morning on May 20, dear, loyal brother
Andreas Wurz, servant of the Word, fell asleep in the Lord with a peaceful
heart. Before his death, he testified to Wurz a good conscience and said
farewell to the brothers and sisters gathered around him, urging them to
remain true to their calling and to live in accordance with it. He had been a
servant of the Word for eighteen years and had worked faithfully as
schoolmaster for seventeen years. He was forty-nine years old.
In 1811 on March 5, brother Paul Tschetter fell asleep in the Lord
with a peaceful heart at the age of 78 years. He was one of those who had
come from Sabatisch in Hungary in 1784 to join the community in Russia.
He was always a diligent worker and honorably carried out his
responsibility for the work in the smithy for twelve years.

In 1811 on December 24, dear brother Jakob Hofer, known to
everyone as Hofer Jakob, fell asleep in the Lord with a peaceful heart. For
fourteen years, he had served the community diligently as assistant
steward. After brother Joseph Kleinsasser passed away from this life,
Jakob was elected as steward for the community and carried out the task
with devotion for five years. He was fifty-eight years old.
When, as was said, dear brother Andreas Wurz died, the church
elected brother Jakob Walter as servant of the Word on May 29, 1810. He
was appointed to this service by the church for a time of testing. On
January 2, 1811, he was confirmed in the service of the Gospel with laying
on of hands. This was done by the Elder, Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen.
These dear older brothers (as has been said) had now completed their
life's course. They had not been spared from struggle but had fought a
good fight and entered into eternal rest. Many other faithful, God-fearing
brothers and sisters passed away as well.
Too numerous to name here, they included people responsible for the
workshops and other departments who were watchful for the community's
well-being in both spiritual and practical matters. Others were chosen in
their place and were appointed to the same services in the church, to work
for the good of the community as their predecessors had done. But soon it
became apparent that most of them did not have the older people's
steadiness, integrity, and diligence in the tasks and services entrusted to
them. They were not watchful enough in the good and peaceful time they
were now enjoying, but were lulled to sleep. They were like the
Laodiceans who grew lukewarm, as we read in John's Revelation.
(Revelation 3:15-16) Just as Christ describes in the parable, Satan was
able to sow weeds among the wheat while the people were sleeping.
(Matthew 13:24) And so as time went on, self-love, selfishness, and
unfaithfulness grew in the community, especially among those responsible
for the various handicrafts. As a result, the community earned less and
less; there were difficulties in paying for its daily upkeep and the
brotherhood soon became extremely poor.
Although there were still some brothers and sisters deeply troubled at
the community's decline, they were no more able to prevent decay than

dear brother Andreas Ehrenpreis and other brothers had been in their day.
In those times the Lord took away many faithful brothers just before the
complete collapse of the community, and so he did now, as the following
names will show.
On May 16, 1814, dear brother Zacharias Wipf fell asleep in the Lord.
He was much loved both in the church and by people outside. He had
served faithfully, preparing and dispensing medicines for sixteen years.
His death was a great grief to many people. He was thirty-six years old.
On June 3 that same year, dear brother Mathies Waldner fell asleep in
the Lord. He was a potter by trade. Later he helped establish a distillery,
where he worked for ten years. He was as much loved by everyone as
Zacharias Wipf had been, a man capable of good service, 36 years old.
From this time onward, there was a spread of selfishness,
partisanship, and a lazy, lukewarm attitude toward everything good,
toward the meetings, and toward communal prayer. Indeed, rebellion
against the ministers and elders was not infrequent, and this caused hatred
and envy. Complete ruin threatened, for as Christ says, Any kingdom
divided against itself will be ruined, and a house divided against itself will
fall. This finally happened to the community, for peace nourishes, but
division destroys. (Luke 11:17)
***************

1818 Community split
The last and greatest misfortune leading to the community's downfall
- diligently promoted by Satan - was that Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen,
servant of the Word and the Elder of the church, became disunited with
Jakob Walter, the assistant servant of the Word. The community was split
into two almost equal camps by this division between the Elder, who clung
with all his might to the system of community of goods, and his younger
assistant, who rejected this old and honored Hutterian tradition. Both
ministers held to their own view with equal obstinacy.

I would rather go to the stake and be burned than abandon the old
customs, said the gray-haired Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen.
I would rather die than go back to community of goods, said the
younger brother who opposed him.
Then Jakob Walter and his brother Darius Walter separated from the
church. Darius had been chosen steward after Jakob Hofer had died.
Taking their children with them, they built a house of their own called
Mahlenki, outside the community, in a valley not far away. Soon other
families joined them. When they realized that they could not remain there
in these circumstances, they broke away from the community completely,
trying with the help of the government in Petersburg to get their share of
the church's property paid out to them in cash. As the government
representative from Petersburg did not succeed in reconciling the two
parties, Jakob Walter and his 143 followers (30 families: 69 men and boys
and 74 women and girls) took their share of the community's goods and
went to the Mennonites who had come from Prussia a few years
previously. These Mennonites had settled on the Chortitza, a tributary of
the Dnieper in southern Russia, about 558 miles [900 km] south of
Radicheva and about 124 miles [200 km] northeast of the Crimea near
Aleksandrovski (in Katerinoslav Province). This took place in 1818. They
arrived safely and the Mennonites took them into their houses during the
winter. They intended to keep to private ownership.
Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen and his followers were still resolved to
go on living in community of goods. They thought that after this
separation the chaff would be gone. But they were mistaken, as was soon
proved. For with some of those who remained, no sense of community or
brotherly love was to be felt, and without this, it is impossible to continue
community. Instead, the people made accusations and complaints over one
thing and another but never over themselves. They grumbled that this was
not right and that was not as it should be. The apostle Paul is careful to
warn believers not to make such complaints. Anyone full of joy and
enthusiasm for community does not complain about others. The apostle
teaches: Don't grumble against each other, brothers, or you will be judged.
The Judge is standing at the door! James 5:9)

***************

1818 Fire destroyed community/community of goods
abandoned
As God no longer wanted to see their doings, he withdrew his
protection and everything was destroyed by fire. The A fire destroyed
blaze was started by carelessness in the smithy. A high wind had sprung
up, spreading the flames to the other buildings until all were burned to the
ground. So the toil and sweat of the dear brothers of earlier days was lost
in flame and smoke. This happened in 1819. News of the fire reached the
others who, as already said, had separated from the community the year
before Jakob Walter and were living with the Mennonites in the Chortitza
area. They moved back to packed up and traveled back to Radicheva with
their minister, Jakob Walter. *
Now they all were in utter distress and poverty, with no shelter and no
possessions, completely at a loss what to do.
The majority of them had neither the heart nor the enthusiasm to
build anew on the old site and establish themselves in community of
goods. In any case they were destitute.
The government officials encouraged them to rebuild. One great lord
in particular talked with them and cited the example of a little bird, which
begins to build again if its nest is destroyed. He also said that when many
fine streams flow into one, they form a river which can do good and useful
work. By this he meant the good and useful work of the community.
All was in vain. They had no courage left for restoring community
life. So a distribution took place. As most of their goods had gone up in
smoke and flames, the site of the communal buildings and the small
amount of land that went with it were shared out among them.
A little village was built in the pine woods on the other side of the
Desna. It was called Neudorf, and they settled there in private ownership.

This is what happened to the church at Radicheva. This short account
is given as a warning to our descendants so that they do not give way to
evil cravings but set their hearts and minds on what is good and on the
sure justice of God. God will remain with you if you cleave to what is
good; otherwise you, too, will be cut off.
Jakob Walter was the minister of the group that had broken away.
Their second minister was Joseph Kleinsasser, who, on April 1, 1818,
while still living in the community, had been elected to the service of the
Gospel and appointed for a time of testing. In June 1822, his service was
confirmed through laying on of hands by the minister, Jakob Walter.
Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen, the Elder, lived in Neudorf, the village
in the pine wood. With him were his second wife, Liesel whom he had
married after the division, and her children Josua and Michel Hofer. Once
the division had taken place he never preached in the meetinghouse again,
but held a meeting for teaching and prayer in his own house. He took little
concern for the congregation that had lapsed into private ownership. He
fell asleep in the Lord on December 14, 1824, at the age of 75 years. He
had been in the service of the Word for forty-two years and had been
entrusted with the care of the church for thirty-one years. He was one of
those who originally came from Carinthia by way of Kreuz in
Transylvania and had endured the harsh persecution in Transylvania, the
flight over the mountains, and the beatings and robbery in Wallachia. The
story can be read earlier in this book, in a report written by his own hand
before 1802.
After brother Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen's death, Jakob Walter was
chosen as Elder of the whole church, and in cooperation with brother
Joseph Kleinsasser, he diligently cared for it in its fallen state.
Shortly after Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen's passing, the church also
chose two brothers as servants of the Word: brother Jakob Hofer, and
Georg Waldner, son of the deceased Johannes. This took place on January
10, 1825.
The members, now living in private ownership, were desperately
poor, so that many suffered even from lack of bread. Each brother had to

find his own means of feeding himself and his wife and children. The
amount of land each owned was so small that there were endless
hardships. They tried to earn their daily bread in various ways - working as
smiths, turners, weavers, or potters; digging; or felling and hauling timber
from the forest.
Only very few owned a horse. All the rest did their work with oxen. It
was a poverty-stricken existence. Even schooling, which we and our
forefathers had always reckoned the most essential of our tasks, was now
completely neglected, so that many children grew up unable to read or
write a single letter. It had never come to this at any other period of our
history. Ruin, material as well as spiritual, threatened our community.
***************

1824 Official report of the deterioration of Radicheva
An account of the collapse at Radicheva written by Councilor of
State Klaus describes conditions in the community at the time: *
Unfortunately one thing was lacking - their original inner unity. Evidently
the thistles, which Hutter had struggled to eradicate three hundred years
earlier in the Moravian communities, were not completely rooted out.
They continued to appear, and due to more favorable conditions, they even
seeded freely.
As already noted, it was a Hutterian principle that all personal
possessions should be surrendered for the good of the community. This
principle was easy to put into practice when they led a wandering life in
desperate poverty, when they were persecuted and each community
member was completely taken up with the daily cares of providing food
and the bare necessities of life. But as soon as the cause prospered and
came into possession of real, solid property, as soon as the community saw
it was protected from all danger of attack from outside, the members
gradually came to feel differently. ... They no longer felt as firmly
persuaded as before that personal property and earthly, temporal goods in

general, were of so little value in comparison with eternal, heavenly joy.
They realized that when community of goods was nothing but a dogmatic
principle, it led to mere imitation of the outward form of the early
Christian churches and lacked the inner, spiritual power essential for
giving strength and viability to this communal association.
The brothers responsible for the community work departments
demanded independence. They no longer used a common purse but each
managed business affairs himself, bought materials, and sold the finished
products. They no longer handed in money to the Elder as they had
formerly done, but only presented their accounts. This gave room for
grave abuses, an opportunity to work for better food, drink, and clothing
for themselves rather than for others.
By such means, the more all the members prospered materially, the
more deeply rooted in the community grew a tendency to slackness, an
inclination to use communal property for personal enjoyment. This
tendency paralyzed the activity of every member and spread apathy,
quarreling, discontent, and envy throughout the community, finally
bringing the brotherhood to inner ruin. In addition, their Elder, Peter Hofer
and Peter Janzen, a man 'of high morals but blindly devoted to his
community's laws and regulations,' had now grown old and weak. Bunin's
opinion was that 'while Waldner may have stirred up discontent among the
members over this or that, it was due to the weakness of old age rather
than evil intent.'
On the other hand, the Elder's assistant, Jakob Walter, a man of equal
integrity, seems to have recognized more clearly than others the root of the
evil that threatened to destroy the prosperity of the community. Even if not
fully conscious of it, he instantly recognized the hopelessness of fighting
this evil in the existent circumstances. This naturally placed him at the
head of the malcontents, so it was his lot to be first in throwing down the
gauntlet to the community.
Even before Bunin's visit, before the end of 1817, a complaint from
the Elder, Waldner, was delivered to the Bureau of Guardianship for
Foreigners in New Russia. It stated that 'the brotherhood's second minister,
Jakob Walter, has given up his office and separated himself completely

from the community' with his brother and two married sons. They had
begun building a house of their own on community land about one
kilometer away from the community buildings and had taken part of the
communal property for themselves. 'From this time on,' says Bunin, 'the
peace of the brotherhood has been shattered. Walter is already living with
his brother and sons in a separate house; he has appropriated part of the
community's property and some horses without any reason and on his own
authority. Yet he visits the brotherhood quite frequently.' Meanwhile, the
wives and children of the renegades continued to live in the community as
they had done before. And, says Bunin, 'the resistance of these people has
influenced several other families until they too, are ready to break their
vow of brotherhood. As a result, those who remain are completely
discouraged.' Although every means of friendly persuasion was used to
win back the first disloyal members, nothing proved of any avail.
Meanwhile, on the basis of a complaint from the Elder, the Bureau of
Guardianship had directed that 'those who have left should come back to
their previous homes, return everything they have taken, and reunite with
the community, or else decide on a different way of life without laying
hands on community property.'
But Jakob Walter made a personal visit to the Bureau of Guardianship
in Yekaterinoslav and handed in a petition signed by twenty-four members
of the Radicheva brotherhood. In this petition, he described the lack of
means for their support and the hardships the brothers were suffering, and
also the favoritism of the Elder, Waldner, who shows more interest in the
private advantage his relatives may receive from any benefits than in
maintaining equal distribution to all,' as stipulated in the brotherhood
regulations. The petitioners then beg 'for each to be permitted to manage
his own affairs and, with this purpose in view, for each to be allotted a
share of the land by dividing up the whole property according to the
number of families in the brotherhood.'
The Bureau of Guardianship was convinced that these mutual
accusations made closer investigation unavoidable. The task was given to
one of their officials, A. Fadjeew, assistant to the chief justice of the
Bureau of Guardianship. He wrote to the Elder at Radicheva that for the

meantime, 'Walter and like-minded persons are not to be forbidden to live
separately, nor are they to be harmed or oppressed in any way.'
These circumstances moved Bunin to attempt to reconcile the hostile
parties. First of all he won over the Elder and, having gained his
agreement, went to find Walter, who was in his house with his supporters
around him. 'They received me respectfully,' says Bunin. In his efforts to
get them to consider a reconciliation, he pointed out among other things
that 'the government, which has a good opinion of the people here, might
change its views if it discovered there was quarreling among them, and
such circumstances could possibly give rise to much unpleasantness.'
In spite of all his persuasion, based on 'love to one's neighbor,' Bunin
could get nowhere. When Walter and his supporters met together with the
other group, they pointed out that they were discriminated against. People
were not fairly treated in the community. Great failings were passed over
and little faults were punished out of prejudice. The food they were given
was very limited in quantity and poor in quality. The sick were not cared
for and the children ran around in rags. It would be much better to divide
up than to live in a community of people who neglected the rules of their
forebears and no longer observed them. At the same time, Walter and his
supporters begged Bunin not to be deceived by the outward order and
quiet, for if he lived only a month among them he would flee from the
community and never look back or be sorry he left. They declared that
their agriculture was deteriorating; the land was leased to people outside
the brotherhood, etc.
In these conditions, Bunin had no success with his attempts to unite
the brothers, although he tried once more at a second meeting in one of the
brothers' houses. While putting the blame on their opponents, Walter and
his supporters continued to assert that the deplorable state of the
brotherhood not only made it impossible for any intelligent person to
remain a member, but also for anyone to consider the church's spiritual
leadership without distress. Various offenses, even theft, had become
commonplace in the community life. This disorder had been going on for
several years under one guise or another. Although people had suffered
from the discrimination, it was only for the sake of restoring order that

they felt compelled to reveal the truth(?)' * to the government. With this,
they asked for the community to be divided up so that people might live
separately as did many Mennonites who had settled in Russia.'
Bunin did not probe further to investigate and judge the situation
more exactly. He limited himself to the general remark that the farm
buildings and workshops, which had been kept in good order by the
brotherhood before the quarrel began, were already showing signs of
deterioration; if this were not to increase, it was necessary to use all
methods to 'restore the community to its old love of peace and to establish
rules with strict oversight from the Elder and without neglect or
discrimination.'
Fadjeew arrived in Radicheva in March of the same year, 1818. He
went deeper into the subject. 'Right from the beginning of the
investigation, I realized that the root of the trouble which is giving rise to
a spirit of strife between the Mennonites there, is the deterioration of the
brotherhood and the contradiction between the rules of the fellowship and
the real circumstances:
After a short, favorable depiction of the characters of Waldner, the
Elder, and of his helper, Walter, and an outline of the brotherhood's
history, its organization on religious and communistic principles, and its
economic condition... Fadjeew continues: 'Once I had been alerted by
Walter's observations of the discomforts and disadvantages of the brothers'
way of life, took a closer look and found that the precepts which the
founder of the community had made obligatory - precepts of strict
morality and indestructible unity - were now for the most part followed
with less stringency. When first transmitted, these rules were held in full
force and provided a rare example of unity among several dozen families.
This was the case while attempts were made to force Roman Catholicism
upon the brothers' forefathers. It was the same during their brief stay in
Wallachia, and also while they lived on Count Rumiantsev's estate, when
their numbers were smaller, when they did not yet possess land of their
own and had to devote part of their earnings to the repayment of advances
from their landlord.'

'Then, however, the brothers moved to their present location where,
with minimal taxes, they received possession of 775 dessiatines [about
2,100 acres] of fertile land and the many advantages occurring from a
favorable situation. It was only now, with the resultant prosperity and with
growing numbers in the community that some discovered it possible, when
among fifty or so families, to live on other people's industry and make
various excuses for avoiding their own share. Concurrently, the inclination
awoke in many to work for private gain and to use the fruit of their labors
to profit their own families. In this way some of the idlers who were not
close relatives and whom they regarded as outsiders could be excluded
from having a share.'
In proof of his statement, Fadjeew pointed out that in 1817 their
income was entered as: seven weavers - 729 rubles 6 kopeks; seven potters
- 969 rubles 8 kopeks; four smiths - 711 rubles 20 kopeks; four joiners 404 rubles 90 kopeks; and three hatters - 586 rubles 25 kopeks. This means
that each of these master craftsmen produced only 100 to 196 rubles. In
view of the good prices and the ready market for the brotherhood's
products, Fadjeew considered that such a profit did not accord with the
facts. He was all the less convinced because in the same brotherhood this
very sum, with food included, was paid to watchmen and workers hired
from the peasantry.
Efforts to live separately with one's own family and enterprise were
supported, Fadjeew asserted, by the example of the other Mennonites with
whom the brotherhood was in contact, as well as by the conditions of
everyday life in the community itself and the disorder and neglect
permitted in some quarters. For instance, the common dining room and
kitchen were far from clean, while the three schoolrooms for the children,
which housed 106 persons, were especially dirty and the air unbearably
stale, resulting in serious sickness among the children. In Fadjeew's view,
the complaint of insufficient food was unfounded, for the noon meal
consisted of bread and vegetable soup, with beef or pork two or three
times a week. Special food was prepared for sick people, 'but the same for
all the sick, and not according to the individual ailment.' Men received two
shirts, women two blouses a year, and both were given two pairs of shoes.
The rest of their clothing came from the community store of woolen and

other material, according to need. In what they called the Kleinen Schule
or kindergarten, Fadjeew found three women in charge of eighteen
children between one-and-a-half and three-and-a-half years old: 'These
children sleep five or six together in a bed without any separation of the
sexes.' In the school for the children of seven and over, there were 88
students, who all learned reading and writing. They learned handicrafts
and handwork according to aptitude.
Fadjeew continues: 'The community has forfeited the admiration once
accorded to it by the surrounding population for its strict way of life.
Communal living was valuable and highly moral while held together by
strong bonds of brotherhood, but now it is even leading its members
astray, running counter to the basic assumption of society in general,
where each family will do everything possible to keep away from the
temptation to immorality and from physical evils. Living here, the father
of a family cannot avoid a conflict of conscience....
Here the population increases very slowly because the supervision
and care of the children is in the hands of ailing: women, weak with age,
and of mothers with very young babies. General measures to preserve
health are either insufficient or neglected. At present, among fifty families
there are only two people over fifty. According to the population record,
the increase since they settled here has totaled only 58 people, and after
the last census the community numbered 242 persons. Consequently, their
numbers will not double in the next sixty to seventy years, while an
approximate count among the Mennonites in New Russia shows a
doubling within thirty years.
These abuses, however, were far from being recognized by all
brothers. On the contrary, many of those in favor of the community rules
were people who would rather suffer a martyr's death than give up
community living. Four brothers who had listened to Fadjeew's
persuasions in favor of division appeared before him the very next day.
Complaining that 'they had been tortured the whole night by terrible
dreams and qualms of conscience,' they requested him to strike their
names off the list.

On the other hand, the deserters, in their rage against the community,
would not yield an inch to the fanatical support which a few gave to the
communal life. The Elder, Waldner, realized that age had weakened him
and rendered him powerless, and in his longing for a reunion, he offered
his opponent Walter the office of church leader. He hoped that Walter's
acute mind and practical efficiency would succeed in eliminating the
disorder that had crept in, would establish a better economic basis for the
brothers, and would alter several damaging brotherhood decisions that
were hallowed more by time and custom than by any real justification.
But Walter's answer was that he would rather die than return to
community. In the end, there was no alternative but to divide the
community. When, however, an attempt was made to induce the
brotherhood of their own free will to give up part of their land and
possessions to the deserters, the Elder and his followers blocked Fadjeew
by saying that their statutes forbade it, and that they would take such a
step only if a decree on the subject was issued by the highest authority.
When Fadjeew reported to the Minister of the Interior to obtain
further directions, he suggested two possible ways of reorganizing the
Radicheva colonists. One was that Walter and his supporters could be
moved into New Russian territory and settled in separate farms on plots of
land allocated to the Mennonites. The other way was to permit them to
have a part of the Radicheva property on the left bank of the Desna, for
their purposes.
***************

1818 Agreement
Without waiting for a government decision, Jakob Wipf, as
authorized representative of the community adherents, and Jakob Walter
as authorized representative of the twenty-four families who had left,
concluded an agreement on July 5, 1818.
Its provisions were:

1. Walter and his followers should move to New Russia, leaving the
brotherhood by the end of that year without fail. Those families which
were leaving but wished to remain in the Ukraine, were made responsible
for choosing their own means of livelihood outside the community.
2. The Radicheva brotherhood must pay each of the departing
families 400 rubles in cash, which made 9,600 rubles for twenty-four
families. They must also pay them 250 rubles for the purchase of a boat,
and must let them take three looms and half the cattle belonging to the
community with the exception of the hogs, which were bought by the
community on credit in the spring of 1818.
3. Families who are moving have the right to take along the clothes
they have received from the community as well as all tools relating to
their trades, except farm implements.

In September 1818, when Walter and his supporters were completely
ready to move away, six more families joined them from among the
community members at Radicheva. So thirty families with sixty-nine men
and boys and seventy-four women and girls, set out on the journey, partly
by land and partly by water. Five women with four children and one man
remained in the community and refused to accompany their Marriage
partners. The wives would not go with their husbands; the husband would
not go with his wife, who was leaving with her father for New Russia. No
persuasion could induce a single one of them to reverse this decision.
Twenty families remained in Radicheva. They expressed the hope that
their circumstances would now improve, although their best master
craftsmen were among those who had gone.
Fadjeew visited the community again about the end of September
1818 and wrote: 'In spite of all who have left, they still have enough
people of every trade to prevent any stoppage in the communal workshops
and in the work about the house. If the Elder keeps proper watch over the
morals of the other brothers so that there is undisturbed harmony, and if

the master craftsmen pay enough attention to the way the work is carried
out, one could have no doubt of their capacity to continue - if only selfinterest, the cause of their present split, could be banned forever from the
community. But the fact is that the infirmities of the Elder, Waldner, and a
meekness unsuited to his office make it unlikely that these evils can be
excluded. All the Mennonites remaining in Radicheva are noticeably
discouraged, although at the same time they believe that the departure of
the others means a more or less complete liberation from the evils which
have disrupted their peace and order.'
That autumn, Walter and his followers reached their place of
resettlement, the Chortitza colonies in Yekaterinoslav province. It was too
late in the year for them to begin building new homes. Most of them could
not decide whether they should found a separate colony or join the
Mennonite villages already in existence. In March 1819, some of the
colonists even voiced the intention of returning to Radicheva and settling
there on family farms. In the meantime, all the community buildings at
Radicheva, all the equipment and a considerable part of the other
community belongings had been burned to ashes. The brothers were
without a roof over their heads or any means of earning a livelihood.
In these desperate straits the Elder, Waldner, informed the Guardians'
Committee that in November 1819 he had permitted the brothers still at
Radicheva to divide between them any of the community's cattle and
goods which had been saved from the fire. This led to the following
decision:

1. Those who wish to return from Yekaterinoslav Province to the
Radicheva colony may do so, but they must settle on family farms and the
layout of the colony must conform to the prescribed regulations; those
who wish to remain in Yekaterinoslav Province must be enrolled among
the Chortitza colonies with the latter's consent.
2. Just as in all other Mennonite colonies, a special village council
will be appointed for the Radicheva colony. The Mennonite Jakob Walter
is nominated for the post of village mayor since he is known for his good

sense and for his experience in economic matters. It is left to the
community to choose from among themselves two capable householders
as his assistants.
3. The previous Elder, Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen, remains church
Elder, and this man, who is now alone and weakened by old age, is not to
be denied the care and respect due to him.
4. Once all families from the Radicheva brotherhood are together, the
village council's first duty will be to divide the land, the livestock, and the
moveable goods justly and equitably among them. Woodlands, orchards,
communal buildings, and the distillery, are to remain common property
and to be used to the best advantage of all, as determined by all parties.
On hearing this, the Hutterites in Yekaterinoslav Province made no
delay in returning to their earlier home. By this means the Radicheva
community was finally dissolved, and after the land and goods had been
divided, two colonies were formed - one of twenty-five families, living
where the communal buildings had been and where the vegetable garden
still remained, the other of twenty-four separate homesteads situated on
the left bank of the Desna.
Babievsky, a member of the Guardians' Committee who inspected
these colonies in the fall of 1821, stated that although the brothers were
unaccustomed to living on separate holdings, and although that year the
crops had completely failed in the district in question, the colonies were
becoming quite successfully established. Both outside and inside, the
arrangement of the houses and farm buildings conformed to the
requirements laid down for them. Cattle raising was on only a limited
scale and could not be increased because the plots of land were too small
and too scattered among other plots. But each householder had the
necessary domestic animals and a few sheep. It was found that the
common woodland was rather thinned out, which was to be explained by
the need to build new houses. Accordingly, the village council at
Radicheva received instructions on the future conservation and use of
woodlands. In regard to public assistance, it proved unnecessary to include
the new settlers in the measures applying to the province as a whole, since
the Mennonites refused government support even when they had used all

their available means - bringing themselves into great hardship - to pay
the high price for grain.
The Elder, Waldner, could not survive the shipwreck of the
community and shortly after its collapse he went to his grave. Those who
shared his views, however, were still full of hope for improvement in the
future. They rebuilt a place for themselves under the new conditions and,
as we have seen, they rejected the help that the government offered them
after a bad harvest. Yet their hopes were vain, finding no fulfillment in
that place for the following reasons:
As already stated, the whole area belonging to Radicheva was not
more than 775 dessiatines [about 2,100 acres]. Consequently, when the
land and all appurtenances were divided, each family received about 15
dessiatines [about 40 acres]. This area may have been sufficient when the
land was worked communally. When it was divided into separate holdings,
it would have met the settlers' needs only if the plots allotted to each
individual family had been conveniently located for farming as a unit and even then only at the beginning, before the community increased in
numbers.
In Babievsky's description, two ominous factors are already evident:
cattle rearing was negligible among the colonists; in addition, they had no
possibility of increasing it because the plots were too small and too
scattered. Everyone knows that either of these factors taken separately the small size of plots or their scattered location - is sufficient to paralyze
any economic progress, especially when the land is in such small parcels
as we see in both colonies at Radicheva. In such a situation neither
untiring diligence nor agricultural knowledge is of any help, and an
increase in population compounds the difficulties.
This ends the report from A. Klaus. We again turn to our history.
***************

1842 Request to leave Radicheva

Finally, after several years had passed, the more perceptive and
farsighted brothers considered their whole situation and realized what a
predicament they were in. They came to the conclusion that it was high
time to leave Radicheva and look for another place to live.
The Elder called the community together and put before them the
disastrous situation and the threat of total ruin for they church. Most of the
people recognized that he spoke the truth; so they decided to look for a
different place and all those in agreement gave their signatures to it.
Such a change of location could not take place without the consent of
the Russian government, so they approached the authorities. They first
turned to the Guardians' Committee for Foreign Colonists in Odessa.
As this committee had the task of supervising foreign settlers, and
our community was counted among these, we presented their office with a
request for help in finding a new location for our group. But the Guardians'
Committee proved hardhearted and without compassion for our
unfortunate handful of people.
More appeals were made to this committee as time went on, some as
written petitions, others in direct interview, begging the authorities to have
pity on our brotherhood and help them to move so that they would not be
completely ruined. Every attempt was in vain, and meanwhile the years
went by. At last the brotherhood decided on another journey to Odessa to
appeal to the authorities in person. The community chose Benjamin
Decker and David Hofer for the task. Their wagon driver was Jakob
Walter, son of Jakob Walter, the Elder.
Commended to God's protection, they set out on their journey with a
petition and the authorization of the whole community. They arrived safely
in Odessa, appeared before the committee, explained their wishes to the
government officials, and presented their plea.
It seemed, however, that there was little hope of obtaining anything
they wanted either by written or spoken appeals. The brothers were
promised a few more parcels of land to add to their present holdings, but
their land was already scattered in small plots in no less than thirty-eight

places! Some of these plots were ten miles [16 km] apart. And what
disputes arose at times from this difficult situation!
***************

1842 Johann Cornies assistance
The two brothers could not accept the committee's decision. They
therefore resolved to go to Johann Cornies in the Molotschna district of
Taurida province, for he was government agent for the Molotschna
Mennonites and Nogais, and a member of the Supervisory Council for
Government Lands. *
After they had been in Odessa a few days the two brothers set out
again and came safe and sound to Cornies' estate at Tashchenak, expecting
to meet him there.
He was, however, in the village of Ohrloff on the Molotschna, where
he had his home. They explained to him what their petition was about,
showed their authorization to act in the name of the brotherhood, and
made a personal appeal that he intervene on their behalf: that he help them
move to new property because they had fallen into abject poverty and
faced certain ruin on their insufficient area of land.
At the same time they visited the Mennonite elder, but he seemed
little inclined to trouble himself about their plight. Then Cornies took up
their cause and promised help on condition that they all move to another
place.
Returning to Radicheva, the brothers reported the happy outcome of
their journey and the terms on which Cornies would assist them.
The community was well satisfied. As soon as Cornies received their
unanimous consent, he began to work in earnest for their resettlement,
turning to Count Kiselev, the Minister of Agriculture, who was a close
friend of his. At first the minister refused to give permission for their

relocation, for slanderous reports about the impoverished brothers had
been made to this nobleman in St. Petersburg; they had been described to
him as bad, lazy people, and the minister told Cornies this. **
Cornies contradicted him, saying that the reports were not true; most
of them were slander. From what he (Cornies) knew, the brothers were
hard-working people who had sunk into poverty because they owned too
little land. It was the government's duty to give a helping hand and lift the
little group from their distress.
In response to Cornies' continued pleading on their behalf, the
minister finally gave his consent to their resettlement, saying, Now it's on
your shoulders.
This happened in the year 1842.
***************

1842 The founding of Huttertal
As it was impossible for everyone in the Radicheva community to
move at the same time, they divided into five groups, each led by an elder
brother. They reached southern Russia in the fall of 1842. In the following
spring, they founded the colony of Huttertal in the Melitopol district of the
Taurida province. It consisted of forty-six dwellings, was situated on the
Molotschna, and was a little under twelve miles [19km] away from
Melitopol, the administrative center.
Because they had not been able to take everything with them, the
brothers had sold most of their goods, which in any case were few enough.
The brotherhood's land in Radicheva had been state property, so they
received nothing for it. The handful of things left were sold at a give-away
price, producing very little cash for the use of the seventy-eight
emigrating families. The founding of the new colony, Huttertal, is
described in this way: *

This year the winter was mild. Plowing was started as early as
February [1843]. In April, sod houses or simlenku were built. Dwelling
houses were to be completed during the summer, but as a period of
frequent rains set in after harvest time and slowed the construction work,
only sixteen houses were erected and roofed over, and none of them were
occupied. The people had to remain in their sod houses all winter. In 1844,
the remaining fourteen houses were built and all thirty were occupied.
Huttertal is located near the River Tashchenack. ... The land
belonging to the colony is level, semi-arid grassland, but near the river it
lies somewhat lower and good hay can be grown.
The soil in general is fertile and productive. The grazing is very rich.
Horses, cattle, and sheep were soon in prime condition, although they had
been in a poor state when they came onto the pasture in spring. If hay is to
be made on the plains, there must be good growing weather in summer
with plenty of rain. With a low rainfall, the grass will not grow high
enough to be mown. There are no stone quarries in the area. When stone is
needed (for building) it is hauled from about forty miles [64 km] off. The
bricks produced in the brickyard are so durable that it is possible to do
without stone. There are no natural woods. The little plantation with its
1,200 trees shows that trees will grow if a sustained effort is made. In a
number of places the soil has a high salt content, but only here and there.
These places are very dusty, especially in dry years, and the grain does not
grow nearly as high as elsewhere.
***************

1843 Huttertal and Johann Cornies
The biography of Johann Cornies' treats more fully both the move of
the Hutterites to southern Russia and the services he rendered on their
behalf: '*
The settlement known as Huttertal was founded in Cornies' later years
and he was a fatherly friend, adviser, and helper to its members in their

difficult circumstances. ... The founding of this new colony took place at
the beginning of 1843, on an area of grassland which Cornies had been
renting for a long time. Cornies directed the whole procedure.
When they arrived, many members of the church were so poor that
they could provide neither a shelter for the winter nor food for their
families. The Molotschna and Chortitza Mennonites looked after them in a
very loving way. Many helped with food, clothes, and other things. The
necessary grain was obtained from the government storehouses as the
result of an appeal from Cornies.
Once the settlement was started, Cornies made sure that all could
build sod houses. Then he sent master workmen
to show them how to make and lay bricks and how to do carpentry, so
that they could erect their dwelling houses as far as possible with their
own labor. But he had the doors and window frames in these houses made
in the Mennonite colonies by skilled craftsmen so that all should be
properly done.
At first, two families lived in every house, but when the second
colony was founded - named Johannesruh, after Johann Cornies - they
moved into separate houses. Thanks to Cornies speaking on their behalf,
they also received an advance of fifteen thousand rubles from the state.
They could never have built their settlement so swiftly and successfully
without it. Thirty houses in all were built, and the new settlers moved into
them in 1844.
All things considered, the colonists in Huttertal became prosperous
very rapidly. By 1846, they were able to pay off the whole of their debt to
the government, and this was largely because Cornies generously and
energetically used his private means to put them on their feet....
In one of his accounts, Cornies expressed special appreciation for the
Hutterites' feeling for education. He writes: 'A surge of new life came with
the opening of the village school for ninety-one children of school age on
November 20, 1845. We are given high hopes for the welfare of our
growing children, thanks to appropriate preparations and the schedule I

have made, and, most important of all, to the fortunate circumstance that
Janzen, the teacher appointed here, cooperates wholeheartedly in the work.
Enthusiasm for school studies goes so far with the people from Huttertal
that as many adults as children, married people, too, have asked the
schoolteacher to hold evening classes for them. **
***************

1843 Dispute over arranged marriages
In another direction, Cornies intervened with a strong will and firm
hand to reform an old church regulation retained by the Hutterites, which
was as oppressive as iron chains, especially for the younger women in the
community. From the time they began living in community of goods,
perhaps from even further back, it had been the rule or custom for parents,
guardians, or other relatives to decide whom a young sister should marry.
Without any reference to her inclination or disinclination, a husband was
chosen for her, the Marriage took place, and she could then find how to
cope with the situation. Raised in slavish obedience, Hutterian daughters
usually did not dare to oppose the church orders, and the old people's will,
even though some young women's hearts may have broken. Weddings were
held only twice a year on days fixed for the purpose, and at those times all
the Marriages took place, some willingly, some out of obedience. *
It so happened at the new settlement that a spirited girl was to be
married against her will to an old widower. In spite of the church
ceremony and in spite of all admonition, she insisted that she would not
become this man's partner. When an attempt was made to lock the couple
in their room together, the girl succeeded in escaping. She took refuge
with the government agent [Cornies] and completely broke down as she
pleaded with him to save her from a relationship to which she had not
consented and never would consent. Cornies situation may well have been
somewhat embarrassing, but he allowed the wife against her will to
become a servant at Taschtschenak, and he made an end once for all to
such compulsory Marriages. For a long time afterward, a wedding could

not take place at Huttertal until the girl had affirmed either to Cornies or
to reliable people in the community that she willingly consented to the
proposed Marriage.
On one occasion, a young man and woman wanted to marry one
another but met with opposition. They came to Cornies in Ohrloff to ask
for his help and advice. Cornies, who happened to be in his office, inquired
into the case more exactly, found everything to be in order with the two
young lovers, and immediately gave the consent for their Marriage. The
pair left his office rejoicing. It was the last decision of this kind made by
Cornies. If women were weak enough in character to be persuaded into
Marriages repugnant to them, that could not be viewed as open coercion,
and nothing could be done about it.
***************

1843 Official report on reasons for our move to southern
Russia
In A. Klaus' Unsere Kolonien, * an Official Report on the Reasons
for the Movement to Southern Russia appears, which may be of service in
filling out this story:
In 1834, a petition from the church at Radicheva reached the
Guardians' Committee for Foreign Colonists in Odessa. (This had earlier
been called the Department of Guardianship.) The brotherhood asked
permission to settle in New Russian territory. In support of the petition
they explained that the land allotted to them was completely insufficient
when divided up for private development, and they found difficulty in
selling their goods and still more in teaching their young people trades and
establishing good habits among them.
The brothers were again at a critical point. It is noteworthy, however,
that this statement by the church is quite different in form and content
from the earlier one of 1818. Then the problem had arisen from quarrels

within the community and was almost exclusively concerned with socioreligious convictions and doctrines. Now there is no trace of differences in
doctrinal views, although the settlers, as we shall see further on, had sunk
both economically and morally to a level far below anything the former
community had ever reached.
In 1818, the mutual accusations between community members
seemed to be very petty in themselves and to have little factual basis; they
amazed anyone who had looked more closely at the community's
circumstances. The second petition had nothing to do with petty
circumstantial detail. It was based on facts so compelling that when stated
they removed all necessity for an inspection. Drawbacks that Babievsky
indicated as far back as 1821 (and that have already attracted our
attention) were now accentuated by the natural population growth; they
were sufficient to convince the officials of the accuracy and truth of the
community's statement that it was impossible for them to exist under
present conditions. Given the circumstances, the logical consequences
were obvious: the impoverishment of the settlers and the impossibility of
providing proper training for their young people or raising them to a
disciplined life with good habits, and so forth.
The authorities responsible for colonization did not confine
themselves to such deductions, however. They sent one of their own
officials to make a direct inquiry, and they gave a hearing to the
representatives of the brotherhood who had come to Odessa.
Thus, they gained factual knowledge of conditions. It was on this
basis that in December 1835 they reported to the government the
substantial reasons for the Radicheva Mennonites' desire to move. The
land allotted to this group could have provided an adequate livelihood for
them only when they were a smaller number of families living as a
brotherhood.
The information showed that in 1834, after the eighth census, the
number of men and boys in both colonies totaled 153. The 775 dessiatines
[roughly 2,000 acres] assigned to them included no more than 270
dessiatines [730 acres] of arable land and even this was divided into fortythree different plots, some at a distance of seven to ten miles from the

home farm and separated from one another by two or three Russian
villages.
The result was that even in good years the settlers did not get enough
grain for their needs and always bought hay in spite of the few cattle they
raised. Their craftsmen, who had increased considerably in number, also
ran into difficulties in selling their products. Because the fields were so
scattered, disputes arose with the Russian peasants; such quarrels were
damaging to the settlers' prosperity and even to their general standard of
behavior. These harmful effects became particularly noticeable after the
earlier elders died, and there was no one to replace them in the school.
The Guardians' Committee for Foreign Colonists tried to obtain
permission for the Radicheva Mennonites to transfer to the province of
Taurida. They thought it would be possible for each family to be allotted
65 dessiatines [175 acres] of the land available for distribution in the
Mennonite area of Molotschna. The committee's suggestions arrived in St.
Petersburg when the Ministry of State Domain was just being formed.
Presumably this was the reason that the proposals did not receive attention
until the ministry was opened, with the Chernigov settlers and all other
colonists transferred to its care. Meanwhile conditions for the Radicheva
settlers deteriorated year by year. Since they were daily hoping for the
permission to move, they did only the most necessary work on their farms,
while their numbers increased considerably. In 1841, there were already
sixty-nine families with 185 men and boys and 199 women and girls.
Under such conditions one can understand the opinions expressed by
local officials who were in correspondence on the subject of the Radicheva
settlers' petition. The Governor of Chernigov and the Court of State
Domain agreed in stating that the colonists no longer had a good
reputation in their area, although the neighboring peasants owed some
improvements in cattle breeding to them. Even the spiritual leader of the
brothers complained that they ignore the precepts of their religion and are
not like Germans.
The Court of State Domain reported that according to their number at
the last census, these Mennonites have more than two-and-one-half
dessiatines [nearly seven acres] per head for farm, arable, and haying

purposes, as well as 375 dessiatines [more than 980 acres] of woodland,
two mills on the Jessman River, a lake full of fish by the Desna, and a
ferry they have rented on this latter river. They could be like the other
peasants in the district, who are less generously provided with land and
other sources of income; they could support themselves without privation
and could carry without arrears the very light tax burden placed on them.
On the other hand, the Court of State Domain also spoke of the widely
separated parcels of land, the distance from centers offering a profitable
sale for the goods produced by crafts and trades - and at bottom, the
colonists' dislike for carrying on the trades and crafts which were of great
advantage to them not long ago, a daily-increasing neglect of farm work,
and the loss of the high moral standards for which they were once
renowned. These were the real reasons why the settlers' condition
deteriorated from day to day and why they were no longer such an asset to
the country as in former years.
Finally, in February 1842, the Radicheva brothers were granted
permission to move, on condition that they all moved as one group, paid
for the move themselves, and left representatives in the place to sell the
property they could not take with them.
We have in front of us a list of the farmsteads; it shows that apart
from two quite destitute householders, the colonists had at their disposal
sums ranging from twenty to three hundred rubles a family. This did not
include the value of the livestock and buildings which had to be sold on
the spot for almost nothing. (All told it was not more than 19 horses, 137
head of cattle, a flock of 137 sheep, and 49 dwelling houses, a
meetinghouse, two schoolhouses, and a grain storage shed.)
Although the brothers had no tax arrears to pay off, their means only
just covered the costs of a 330-mile [534 km] journey to the province of
Taurida. In view of these circumstances, the government feared incurring
great expenses, and permission for the settlers to move was not granted
until the Molotschna Mennonites had given them a definite guarantee. The
Mennonites - in particular their representative Cornies, who was
personally known to the minister, Count Kiselev, and had his full trust assured them that once the Chernigov colonists were transferred to the

Molotschna district it would take them only four or five years to
reorganize completely and become prosperous. Cornies would assume
direct responsibility for settling them near his model farm at Tashchenak
and for raising locally (without burdening the state) any assistance the
colonists needed in their initial stages. In autumn 1842, the Radicheva
colonists arrived at their destination. They had not only used up their
slender means for the journey, but had also run into debt. They were
allotted 65 dessiatines [175 acres] for every farming family. For fifty
families this amounted to an area of 3,300 dessiatines [8,800 acres]. This
piece of land, on the Tashchenak River, 12 miles [19 km] from Melitopol,
was nothing but waterless steppe, and wells were essential before a
farming colony could settle there. As for woodland, there was not so much
as a bush. The nearest stone quarry was 40 miles [64 km] away on
someone else's land.
In these circumstances, it must have appeared extremely difficult to
found a successful settlement. But patience, hard work, sensible direction,
and neighborly assistance overcame all the problems. Our desperately
poor people were advanced an interest-free loan of 15,000 rubles from the
community funds. Cornies provided temporary places for the young adults
by having them work for wages with reliable local farmers and craftsmen.
With the loan and with the help of these earnings, the settlers took up the
project in spring 1843 of installing a well for each household, and
fortunately a suitable place was found for them. This removed the chief
obstacle to settling here, and the colonists began without delay to
construct dwelling houses and farm buildings. The land was put down to
arable fields, hay, and pasture according to the Mennonite system. The
winter grain was sown by autumn with the help of the Molotschna
Mennonites. The new settlers were able to take care of seeding the
summer grain from their own resources. In 1843, Cornies assured the
Minister of State Domain that the Radicheva people under his charge were
hard workers, orderly, clean, peaceable, and obedient; under good direction
they could reach a prosperous condition. The local officials confirmed this
report, and the assertion was soon fully justified.
The colony was named Huttertal. (Locally they were called the
'Bearded Ones' because, for religious reasons, the Radicheva colonists did

not shave.) The settlers steadily paid off the debts incurred from their
journey and new beginning. Their prosperity became obvious, and at the
same time their numbers grew so rapidly that by 1852 it was necessary for
seventeen young families to settle on land available on similar terms in
the same district. Here they formed a separate colony, Johannesruh. Now,
after the tenth census (1857) Huttertal already numbers 50 families with
255 males registered, and Johannesruh has 21 families with 72 souls. Both
colonies are extremely well-built: the farmsteads are hidden by the green
of garden land and plantations; one has the strong impression of
contentment and prosperity on every side. Johannesruh with its forty farms
makes an outstanding impression of a rich and thriving colony. All the
buildings there are of fired brick, and roofed with tiles.
A correspondent of the religious and political weekly Süddeutsche
Warte (Nos. 19-21, 1867) asserts that, generally speaking, each
householder in the two colonies owns more property and liquid assets than
the entire Radicheva group possessed at the time they moved from
Chernigov Province. This estimate of the prosperity prevailing in both
colonies is not quite accurate as it is based purely on outward
appearances....
The colonies of Huttertal and Johannesruh are laid out on the same
plan as all Mennonite colonies, on level ground with two rows of houses
equally spaced. Between the two rows runs a wide street. The front of each
house faces the farmyard, while the side, with two windows, is toward the
street, separated from it by a garden of about five hundred square feet. In
this way, the whole length of the street is bordered on both sides by flower
gardens and groves of trees, and the buildings are hidden by the foliage.
The visitor goes through the main entrance from the yard into a spacious
entry room with a no less roomy kitchen at one end. The rest of the
dwelling space is divided into equal halves by these two central rooms....
The stable is directly accessible from the dwelling quarters and from
the yard behind, as it stands side by side with the farm house under the
same roof. The well is usually in the stable or in the kitchen. ... The
Hutterites' clothing is as simple as before, but decent and quite clean. The
men wear coats which fasten to one side with hooks and have turned down

collars; the coat-tails reach almost to their knees. Hats, breeches, and vests
are the same as worn previously, but shoes have been replaced by boots
that go above the knee. To this day Hutter's followers shave neither the
upper lip nor the chin (which is why they are called 'bearded Mennonites')
and they wear their beards long. There has been no marked change in the
women's costume, but one notices that other dark colors are worn in
addition to blue.
Their staple diet consists of milk, potatoes, and fruit. On workdays
whole wheat bread is generally preferred. White bread and meat dishes are
usually served only on holidays. Stimulating drinks and coffee, too, are
almost unknown to the Hutterites. They supply their place by a drink
called pribs, which is made by pouring boiling water on roasted barley or
rye.
There are no social gatherings; these are not permitted. Church
holidays are passed in the meetinghouse in the close circle of household
members and intimate friends, or are spent in taking walks. Weddings and
other family celebrations are held quietly and as simply as possible. The
Hutterites attach very serious meaning to these acts, and once the religious
meeting is over they find it sufficient to remain together for a short,
simple meal. According to the statement of an eyewitness, who also
supplied us with the details given above, their uniformity and genuine
humility deserve special mention. These characteristics of every member
of this brotherhood obviously reflect the nature of their code of rules for
church-community, which requires that they strive for complete equality
and no difference between them. ... No one keeps to this principle more
strictly than the Hutterites, who actually are not distinguished from one
another by lifestyle or any exterior details. Looking from one to another
we see, so to speak, the same habits and needs, the same clothing, the
same food; to sum it up: the same way of life, the same outlook, and
finally, almost the same facial expression. While notable for their
exceptional humility and openhearted humanity - ready at any time to help
their neighbors wherever possible, regardless of nationality or religion the Hutterites are especially noteworthy because they submit to their lot
without complaint. These characteristics often make them the victims of
deception by their unscrupulous neighbors, who take advantage of their

simplicity and kindness of heart. In this respect the brothers recognize that
they are completely defenseless.
***************

1847 Freiherr von Haxthausen report on Huttertal
Two years after the Hutterites began to settle in Molotschna August
Freiherr von Haxthausen visited Huttertal. He wrote about his
impressions: *
On the Molotschna River in South Russia 647
When I visited Huttertal with Herr Cornies, the brothers were still
living in sod huts, but were hard at work transporting stone, slaking lime,
preparing clay, etc., to erect their houses in Mennonite style. It was plain
to see that they were decent, steady people. Their neighbors, the
Mennonites, assisted them as much as they could. What distinct and
lasting characteristics are imprinted by nationality! Just as the Mennonites
can still be identified as former Frieslanders, so the Hutterian Brethren
have preserved their southern German traits intact in spite of having left
Germany two hundred years ago. Dialect, costume, temperament clearly
distinguish them from the Mennonites.
I went with Herr Cornies down into the sod hut belonging to their
church Elder, Jakob Walter. There was plenty of space. It was divided into
several sections or rooms and had a kitchen. Everything looked clean and
orderly.
The church Elder showed me a most remarkable manuscript, [Das
Gross Geschichtbuch].... The handwritten folio includes the teachings of
Jakob Hutter, and a description of his fate and that of his church. ... The
chronicle was continued up to the present day, always written by the
elders. Unfortunately, I was short of time and could only glance through it.
Besides theological disputations, it contained a great amount of most

interesting historical notes, in particular about the early Reformation
movements and the Thirty Years War.
Naturally the people regard this book as something of a holy relic and
would never let it out of their hands, but they would be quite ready to
allow a copy to be made if a public library were ready to spend a few
hundred talers for the purpose. **
***************

1846 Attempt to re-establish community of goods
In spite of their long sojourn in one alien country after another,
Mennonites and Hutterian Brethren have preserved their national
characteristics because, due to their religious convictions, they never
intermarry with other groups.
In Huttertal, the brotherhood prospered materially, and they were
content. Their forefathers' sharp, clear teachings on community of goods
were still read out to them, however, and in the course of time, first one
and then another became concerned that they no longer practiced this as
their forefathers had promised to do. They also possessed other wonderful
books from the time in community, and these, praise God! have been
preserved among us to this day and are cherished as a precious treasure writings which are now almost four hundred years old.
Georg Waldner, commonly called Jörgela, had been chosen as the
Elder by a majority vote and confirmed by elder Jakob Walter in 1846. He
was one of the group who were eager to reestablish community, and who,
because of this, now separated from the others for worship. They held
meetings and listened to teachings in Johannes Stahl's house. Later, until
they moved away, they met in Mathies Kleinsasser's house. Mathies at
first appeared to be full of fire and enthusiasm, but in 1857, when the
decisive move took place, he proved to have come to love the world too
dearly, and therefore he remained behind.

In the meantime, Zacharias Walter was elected as helper elected to
assist to the Elder, Jörg Waldner. The others, who continued in private
ownership and attended the sermons in the meetinghouse, were led and
taught by Jakob Hofer and David Hofer.
This time of division among the brothers was very difficult. There
was a great deal of quarreling and unnecessary argument about community
of goods, although the apostle warns us against such disputes. In addition
to these two parties, a third group existed that sided neither with the one
nor the other, for those composing it had no steadiness or inner
convictions but, as people had done in Elijah's day, they went limping with
two different opinions.
The brothers headed by Jörg Waldner, who were trying to re-establish
community of goods, sent a delegation to speak to the Guardians'
Committee in Odessa and to other government departments in other
provinces. They applied for permission to give up their private holdings
and to purchase in common a piece of land for their undertaking. But the
committee rejected their petition.
The petition by Jakob Walter and Jörg Waldner of October 20, 1848,
as well as the explanatory letter of 1848 and the petition of 1852, shed
light on the deep division of the Hutterian Brethren at that time. *
***************

Petition of 1848
To the Guardians' Committee for Foreign Colonists in. Odessa, South
Russia
A most humble petition from the Elders of the Hutterian Church in
the Molotschna Mennonite distich
In the name of the church of the brothers consisting of fifty families,
we, as church elders take the liberty to present the following petition to

you:
Many years ago, our forefathers founded a Christian community in
accordance with the words of our Savior and his apostles in the Holy
Scripture. A house of brotherly community was built and the entire
community lived there. The community was regarded as one family. The
old, crippled, sick, and weak, the widows and orphans were given a home
and were provided by the brotherhood with clothing and other physical
necessities.
After many years had passed in brotherly love, a few brothers grew
dissatisfied, finally causing a change of location for the church. When
communal living was abandoned, we moved near to the River Molotschna
in the Alexandrovsky District of Tavrichesky Province (Taurida).
The governor of Chernigov Province had instructions from the
Ministry to encourage us not to break up the community but to remain
members of the brotherhood with all things in common. Nonetheless, our
leaders at that time did not allow this. Now we often feel very sorry we did
not allow ourselves to be persuaded to persist in brotherly community of
goods.
Therefore, with unanimous agreement from the fifty families
mentioned above, we appeal to the Guardians' Committee for Foreign
Colonists to help forward our plans and grant us permission to return to
our earlier conditions and to build a colony expressly for this purpose.
Because of the hostility to this project, shown not only by our brothers but
also by our elders, we have made bold to approach the Department and ask
for help. We present our petition for the consideration of the Head of the
Committee so that he may grant us a suitable piece of land or permit us to
look for such a property. Then we will be able to say to our opponents: If
you want to go left, we will go right; and if you want to go right, we will
go left so that there is no quarreling between us.
In the hope that our petition will receive consideration, we append
our signatures in the name of the aforementioned church.
Huttertal, October 20, 1848

The Church Elders:
Jacob Walter
Jegor (Jörg) Waldner
Representatives of the Church:
Iwan Gofer (Johann Hofer
Michel Hofer (Hofer)
Mathies Kleinsasser
Darius Walter
Heinrich Stahl
Jegor Gofer (Jörg Hofer

Although the first petition was rejected, a second letter was written
that same year to present to the Guardians' Committee a summary of the
reasons why the Hutterites were appealing for help. *
***************

1848 Reasons for the split in Huttertal
We who have signed our names at the end of this letter on behalf of
the church feel compelled to present this account in childlike trust before
the honorable Guardians' Committee in order to inform them about the
foreign colonists in southern Russia.
Some years back, in 1819, when the Huttertal Colony was under the
supervision of the former bureau at Yekaterinoslav, the said bureau found

it good that in all colonies of foreign settlers in southern Russia the
religious officials and district officials should have joint responsibility for
law and order and for the promotion of well being among the colonists.
The said bureau issued strict orders to all colonies that no further reports
must be sent to its office without the signature of a spiritual leader.
Under the regulations of the bureau existing at that time, the Huttertal
Colony was governed in precise observation of them until 1843, and while
this continued there was peace and unity: each member was of the same
mind and purpose as the other as long as the older members were in
control. This was pleasing to both God and man.
Soon after the people of Huttertal moved to Taurida Province, great
changes took place in the government of the colony. The spiritual leaders
were declared unfit to share the administration with the village officials. It
was said, The old do not understand; the young ought to be in control. The
older members were despised and mocked by the younger members. This
is what caused the deterioration and division at Huttertal Colony.
We want to relate the following instances to give some idea of the
abuses that have gone on in the Huttertal congregation in the past few
years.
FIRST, a young man of twenty was married with the consent of the
church elders. The village officials in Huttertal opposed the Marriage;
they hired the young man out to learn a trade. When the arrangement was
brought into effect, the young man ran away from his master in Huttertal
and returned to his wife. For this he was sentenced to a whipping, and
three brothers, one after the other, were requested to carry out the
sentence. Their religious beliefs did not permit them to do it. As a result,
one of the brothers, G. W., was knocked down and kicked while in the
mayor's office and was punished by having to dig a ditch over thirty yards
long. Afterwards, the Molotschna Mennonite Association forbade the
church officials to conduct any future Marriages without its consent. This
has led to much provocation. Younger people have been married and older
ones made to wait.

SECOND, the village officials have forcibly taken grown children
from their parents in the Huttertal Colony and have hired them out in the
Molotschna Colony, where some of them have been harshly treated. This
has caused much grief to the parents, and they have often wept over it.
THIRD, Zacharias Walter in Huttertal had an ailing daughter. In 1848,
the village mayor forcibly removed her from her parents and hired her out.
She died two weeks after the end of her term of service. Walter and his
wife objected to hiring out the delicate girl. As a result, the village
officials shut Walter up in a dark dungeon for a week and threatened to put
his wife in the stocks.
All this greatly pained J. W., the spiritual leader, and he reproached
the village officials for their brutality. Shortly afterwards, they came in
person to the Elder's home and told him he was not to speak in the
congregation. If he failed to heed this order, they said, they would take
him to Yekaterinoslov and put him in prison.
Walter summoned the whole congregation and endeavored to bring
reconciliation and restore the earlier arrangement of joint control by the
district officials and the older members. The discussion lasted two days,
but nothing came of it in spite of all the church's efforts.
Immediately afterwards, the Elder's two assistants, J.H. and D.H.,
took the liberty of prescribing a list of new points, rules, and regulations
for the colony. These rules were to be unbreakable. The village mayor,
Christian Waldner, read them out to the assembled community. The whole
congregation decided it was unnecessary to observe these rules. The
church Elder then wanted to take the list home and consider it more
carefully. At this, David Hofer, his assistant, snatched the paper from the
Elder's hand, declaring, You are not worthy of reading it. The congregation
told Hofer, It's a disgrace to act like that. The village head said, He isn't
worthy to read it, either.
Now, dear unbiased reader, give this situation just consideration: How
can there be peace, love, and unity in a congregation when the members
and the church elders are treated in such an unchristian way! This is the
reason the Huttertal congregation split in two.

In addition, the Molotschna Mennonite District Council and the
Association made a visit to Huttertal. A meeting was held immediately. In
the gathered congregation, Wiebe, who was from the Association, stood up
and asked the mayor whether Huttertal wasn't going to pieces spiritually
and materially. The mayor affirmed this.
We wish to explain a little to the Guardians' Committee why the
Huttertal settlers are so weakened in material and economic ways. The
only reason is this: at the beginning they did not use all the land granted to
them by the crown. They used only half, and the Association rented out the
rest to strangers. This went on for six years. It was therefore necessary for
the Huttertal householders to rent land at a high rate from the neighboring
Russian and Tartar peasants - six to seven rubles in paper money per
dessiatine, while having to lease out their own land at fifty kopeks in
silver per dessiatine. If the Huttertal settlers had wanted to use all their
land from the start, in good years they would have been able to store an
ample supply of food for their people and cattle. But now a thousand
rubles have been paid out from Huttertal for pasture and arable land.
On orders from the Association, in 1844 and 1845, the village
officials demanded a quantity of wheat from every householder in
Huttertal to pay off the money advanced to us for building our dwelling
houses. The householders could not supply the amount because they did
not have so much, but the village officials refused to believe that this was
really the case. A gray-haired man of sixty was in the mayor's office trying
to put forth the other side in a friendly manner, but the village officials
grossly insulted him, spat, and said, You've got a beard down to your
navel, and your wits must be growing whiskers, too. You're all liars. The
church had to bear other such affronts from these officials as well. The
price of wheat in those two years was seventeen rubles in the official
currency, yet was deducted from the Huttertal householders' debts at only
thirteen rubles per chetvert. *
[The signatures, apparently written on a separate page of the original,
are missing.]
***************

Petition of 1852 appeal for suitable land
Members of Huttertal colony appealed again in the summer of 1852
for land suitable for a church community just like our forefathers had.
To the most estimable Guardians' Committee: A humble petition
concerning foreign settlers in Odessa, southern Russia, presented by the
church council of the Huttertal congregation from the Molotschna
Mennonite District.
In the name of all the undersigned families, we approach you most
humbly with the following request:
WHEREAS, in an order dated December 4, 1848, the Guardians'
Committee for Foreign Settlers rejected our earlier petition and refused us
permission to establish a brotherly community as our forefathers did:
THEREFORE, the church has considered the matter well and
carefully over an extended period and has reached a common conviction
that it is in no way possible for us to attain peace of soul unless we put our
lives in order by returning to our earlier religion and living in a properly
established brotherly community.
In fear and trembling and in utmost humility we hereby request the
most estimable Guardians' Committee that they grant our most lowly
petition and make arrangements to present our plea to the higher
authorities. It is true that at an earlier date our previous representatives
wished to move to the Molotschna district and that this was graciously
permitted by the higher authorities, but we cannot on this account give up
the faith we confess, deny our adherence to it, and accept the beliefs and
tenets of the Mennonites in the area. This is impossible; we have no
intention of joining their confession because they find themselves able to
conform with more than we do and take the commandments of God and
the sense of the Gospel less exactly than we do.

Our articles of faith require us to have the benefit of temporal and
spiritual community, not that one of us has a great deal while the other
suffers lack, as it is among the Molotschna Mennonites. The true,
apostolic foundation is in this statement: None of them were in need, for
they had everything in common. That is the true foundation of our faith.
And as we cannot feel at peace, we venture in all humility to approach the
Guardians' Committee and His Excellency with the heartfelt plea not to
deny us your just and fatherly protection.
We beg that through the kind intervention of His Excellency we may
receive permission from our exalted and gracious Emperor to set up a
church community just like our forefathers had. In order for us to pass our
days in peace and Christian contentment, as accords with our faith, we ask
you most humbly to grant us your gracious help that we may receive
permission to establish a place in accordance with the contract concluded
with our forefathers and the subsequent decree on May 22, 1801, of His
Imperial Majesty Alexander I, now at rest in God. Without this, our
consciences cannot find peace.
It is also impossible for us to continue living in the Molotschna
district. We cannot remain content in a place where we are not allowed
travel permits to sell our products and earn our bread.
In the hope that His Excellency will not refuse our request, but will
grant us fatherly and truly Christian protection, we remain your most
obedient servants as members of the
Huttertal Colony 8 June 1852
***************

1852 Fragment of letter on community of goods
A fragment of an undated letter which seems to have been written
during this period speaks of the depth of the longing for a restoration of
full community.

We the undersigned state our reason for leaving your church: We
recognize in the depth of our hearts that the more time passes, the further
we stray from the true way that Christ trod before us, the way which we
deserted over thirty years ago. Therefore, we have decided with God's help
to seek again what we have lost. And as you are not in agreement with us,
there can be no unity between you and us. In the Gospels and in our old
teachings, we find no hope of attaining salvation in the way we are now
living. It is impossible unless we turn back and seek what we have lost: at
present we are opposed to Christ. He says, 'No man can serve two masters;
you cannot serve God and mammon.' When one master commands,
'Renounce all that you have,' while the other says, 'Keep everything you
have and hold it as your own property,' those are two opposite ways. So we
tell you in the first place that we will not let your false, deceptive ideas
distort the Gospel of Christ. We refuse to change to another gospel, for
there is no other. So you can see that we will not let you alter the Gospel
with your false leaven nor let anyone dig out the first boundary markers of
the apostolic church. We are not going to believe that the holy apostles
moved the boundary markers fixed by Christ, and you will not prove it of
them however much you brazenly resist them. We have enough fruits and
know that this is the true foundation, sure and beyond dispute:
Christ, our Lord and Savior, the living Son of God, himself began
community of temporal goods with his disciples. If you are honest and
straight, you cannot deny it. Christ gave this example to teach us that in
his church the members do not have private purses. The buds and branches
should produce the same fruit as the vine has done. It would be a misfit if
the fruits we produce were private property and greed.
We have enough evidence in the apostles' writings that they did not
fall away as those who lead astray say they did. On the contrary, they
taught that we are all members of one body, and should prove it by each
one seeking his neighbor's advantage and not his own. They spoke of the
church as one body with many members where each lives not for his own
sake but for mutual care and service with all the others. For we, who are
many, are one loaf and one body. Love does not seek its own advantage,
which is the same as saying, 'Love knows nothing of private property.' And
since all this is true, it is an article and foundation of our Christian faith,

the faith into which we have all been baptized. We will not let you darken
it and put it out, whoever may dare to make the attempt.
Do you not know that the last sentence of the New Testament
concludes by saying, 'If anyone adds to these words, God will add to him
the plagues described in this book; if anyone takes away from them, God
will take away his part in the book of life and in the holy city and in all
that is described in this book.' Why, then, are you not afraid to add 'private
property' and assert that salvation can be won by those who possess private
property? - for this is against the teaching of Christ and against the article
of the Christian faith about community of saints. We do not envy you the
burden you load on yourselves, for is there a quicker means of conforming
to the world and its hypocrisy than by holding private property? Does
anything choke the good seed more swiftly than private property? Does
anything make a man look back and lose heart more quickly than private
property? - for he thinks, 'What am I to do? I would lose what is mine.'
When greed and lust have once entangled a man and bound him to
temporal possessions, they put innumerable cords around his neck and
even make him eager for more bonds.
When you say we are not the right people to handle this matter in the
church, we reply, 'The fault is yours and lies with you. You do not realize
your situation or who or what you are. In Romans 14, Paul says, 'Why does
anyone of you pass judgment on your brother and another despise him? We
will all have to stand before the judgment seat of Christ.' He will judge us
and you, too. We affirm with Christ, if a man is held back by his fields and
possessions, or his yoke of oxen, or his wife and child, he will not be
present at the Lord's Supper. If he cannot follow Christ in true surrender
and renounce all his possessions, if he does not believe in and dedicate
himself in the community of saints, in obedience to God and his church, he
cannot be Christ's disciple. If you find fault with what we say, you are
quarreling with Christ and his apostles on these points. They are not our
words, but the words of Christ, the Son of the living God. You want to
drink out of one cup in the community of the Lord's supper, but you will
not agree to eat communally out of one bowl.

With this, we will conclude our message of the Gospel truth and beg
you not to demand of us something that we cannot do. We have made a
covenant with God that with his help we will keep to the truth we have
recognized. Do not sin against us.
[The signatures are missing.]
***************

1856 Community of goods attempted at Kutcheva
At last, after years of effort, their request was granted in 1856.
Joyfully, they began preparations for the move. They sold their farms to
the private owners in Huttertal who were remaining behind. Then they
looked for a piece of land to suit them, and found one of 1,500 dessiatines
[about 4,000 acres] at a price of 21,000 rubles. It belonged to the estates of
a woman named Kutcheva, and was situated in Yekaterinoslav Province
not far from Orechov.
The thirty-three families pooled the proceeds from the sale of their
farms, and expenses were met from the common fund. These families left
their old home of Huttertal on March 1, 1857, with Jörg Waldner as their
leader. They settled on the communal property and founded a colony
which they called Kutcheva (Hutterdorf). Here they re-introduced the old
orders for community that had been practiced earlier but abandoned for
thirty-eight years. *
They had scarcely started living in community of goods when inner
difficulties arose, splinter groups formed, the exclusion of various
community members took place, and the complete breakdown of the
whole undertaking was only too painfully obvious. The elder, Jörg
Waldner, fell asleep in the Lord in the autumn of 1857, dying from grief
and heartbreak shortly before the collapse of the community. It is no
wonder he longed and often prayed to the Lord for his life on earth to end,
for he could already foresee the sad outcome. He was sixty-eight years old
and had served the church faithfully for thirty years.

We must also record that in 1855, two years before Jörg Waldner's
passing, Elder Jakob Walter in Huttertal, died at the age of 85. He had left
Sabatisch in 1784 and had traveled with his father Jakob Walter and a
number of brothers and sisters to the Vishenka community in Russia. He
was elected as servant of the Gospel in 1810, and continued in this service
right into his old age. After Jörg Waldner's death, community of goods was
abandoned.
Each went back to private ownership, but most of them still remained
together in Kutcheva (Hutterdorf). They found themselves in great poverty
both materially and spiritually, for their elder, Jörg Waldner, had been
taken away by death, and his helper, Zacharias Walter, had been dismissed.
A meeting was therefore arranged in Hutterdorf and it was agreed that
ministers must be elected. Those chosen were Jörg Hofer, Michel Waldner,
and Darius Walter, who were first appointed for a time of testing and were
then confirmed in 1858. In the name of God, these three ministers soon
started to live in community once more: first Michel Waldner in 1859 in
Hutterdorf.
Jakob Hofer from Huttertal joined him and was afterwards elected a
minister. The minister Jörg Hofer and several other brothers and sisters
came to join this community.
The words of an unknown Hutterian author give an account of how
community of goods was re-established at Hutterdorf in 1859 **
***************

1858 Community of goods re-established
I have written with the help of God and the honor of God how in the
beginning through the grace of God and the support of the Holy Spirit, the
community of goods began again in Russia. How they were gathered
through the Holy Spirit as it was established in the time of the apostles
where it says in Acts 2:44-45: 'All those that believed were together,

having all things in common. Their goods and whatever they owned they
sold and distributed it among themselves according to need.'
After the community had drifted apart for about 40 years and the true
Christian community had stopped, and everybody was living in individual
ownership, they still elected servants of the Word and went to church
every Sunday. There were some very zealous servants among them, but
they did not have enough power to re-establish community again.
Some even tried twice to come together, with several families and
their servants of the Word, wanting to establish true community again. But
they did not bring it about. Without doubt they must have prayed to God
for help to establish his work and for the establishment of the Holy Spirit,
and thus bring the people to community again. But without the help of God
and his support, his work cannot be brought about.
Then it happened that approximately in the year of 1858, several
servants of the Word were elected. Among them were Jakob Hofer and
Michel Waldner. After they were on probation, they were confirmed with
the laying on of hands in the service of the Word. All of this happened
while they were still in private ownership. But when they were preaching
the wonderful teachings of community that our forefathers had put
together, and which many have sealed with their blood, they were brought
to consider what these beautiful teachings amounted to, and that it was not
right to teach or, to preach these sermons while living in private
ownership. We cannot understand how they can preach these teachings
when their way of life in many important issues says, 'No' to it and does
not testify in deed to what they are actually teaching. And since God the
Lord took pleasure again to establish true church community, so he also
found ways and means to do it.
And so it happened, before Michel Waldner was elected as a servant
of the Word, that he took very sick. His relatives were crying, believing he
was dead, for he had stopped breathing and they believed he had died. But
he was not dead; he was only in a trance, and God had shown him a very
important vision.

Namely, there came to him a leader or guide in his dream. First, this
guide showed him a holy host of many thousands of angels, which were
singing and praising God, undescribably beautiful. Yes, the singing was so
indescribably beautiful that he could not forget it in his whole lifetime.
Then this guide took him away from that beautiful singing and showed
him hell, and the great number of the condemned, which was terrible to
see - namely, the pain and the torment which no man can imagine, which is
waiting there for the damned. Then Michel asked the guide, 'Where will
my place be?' And he said, 'Can you tell me if any man at the time of the
flood was saved, outside of the ark, who did not drown!' And Michel said
that nobody was saved.
Then the guide said, 'Now you know where your place will be,' as if
he wanted to say, 'the ark is the church with true community of goods, to
which you do not keep. Then Michel began to cry and he felt as if he were
starting to fly, and his guide just disappeared from before his eyes.
When he came back to his senses and opened his eyes,
Michel saw that his relatives were standing around his bed crying.
When they saw that he was not dead, they turned from their crying and
were overjoyed, and thanked God that Michel had come back to them
again. And with the help of God, Michel got well again.
'But then he began to struggle. He pleaded with God, if it would be
his holy will, that Michel might lead them on the right way, and not
forsake God. And soon after this dream, Michel was appointed to be a
servant of the Word, as we have already heard. But he was now pleading
much more to God, that God would find ways and means to establish this
holy work. Michel told this dream to Jakob Hofer, also a servant of the
Word. After that, Jakob Hofer fell into deeper consideration, and began to
pray seriously to God. Those two came together, this Michel Waldner and
Jakob Hofer, discussing the Word of God, strengthening themselves,
falling on their knees, and most seriously calling to God that he should
show them with power from on high how to establish this work of the Holy
Spirit through them, and that this might happen in honor and praise and
glory to his holy name. They did not counsel with flesh and blood any
longer, but only with God the Almighty, who knew their hearts. And God

empowered them from on high and strengthened them to go forward with
this undertaking.
Finally, they came together to pray and said to one another, before
their prayer: 'Whoever will finish his prayer first will stand up and
confirm the other with the laying on of hands into the membership of the
church community, because all things have to be established according to
Christian regulations.' Then they fell onto their knees and prayed very
seriously to God that he would help them and grant them his grace, to
accomplish their undertaking.
Jakob Hofer was the first to finish his prayer. He rose up and with the
laying on of hands, he accepted Michel Waldner into the membership of
the church community. Then Jakob Hofer knelt down and Michel Waldner,
with laying on of hands, accepted him. All this happened with the help of
God and the support of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him shall
be alone the praise, the honor, and the glory.
After this, they accepted their wives and sisters into the church
community, and thus began the community of the Holy Spirit. Their goods
they brought together to establish the church community, and then they
began to go out and preach and teach about this true way of true
community. And God gave them blessings, that the church community
grew and increased.
Amen. God shall be honored and praised for it.
And whoever, here in this time, will abide and live in the community
of saints and be faithful until the end, he will in time to come also be
worthy to live in the community of saints, when Christ will say, 'Come
unto me, you blessed of my Father. Inherit the kingdom that is prepared
for you from the beginning of the world.'
This is the beginning of our Schmieden community in Russia, in the
village of Hutterdorf, or Kutcheva.
***************

1860 Darius Walter start second bruderhof
A year later, in 1860, another community was founded in this same
Hutterdorf by the minister Darius Walter with his own brothers and several
others who were enthusiastic for the undertaking. The minister Jörg Hofer
then left Michel Waldner's community and joined Darius Walter's, where
he remained to the end of his life.
By 1860, there were two colonies, both in Hutterdorf, which had
resumed the wonderful practice of community of goods. Michel Waldner's
community was at one end of the village, Darius Walter's community at
the other, and those who owned private property were in the middle.
Meanwhile, in 1857, several servants of the Word had been chosen by
majority vote. After a time of testing, they were confirmed in the service.
Those chosen were the teacher Martin Waldner from Huttertal, where
David (Davidl) Hofer and the same Martin. were elders, and Peter Hofer
and Jakob Wipf at Johannesruh, where these two were jointly responsible.
***************

1864 Third group attempts community of goods
In 1864, a new movement toward establishing community of goods
took hold of the colonies of Huttertal and Johannesruh. This movement
deserves special attention. The most progressive, prosperous, and steady
private farmers - with Martin Waldner, David Hofer, Peter Hofer, Jakob
Wipf, Samuel Kleinsasser, and others taking the lead - reached the
conclusion that in spite of the obvious material prosperity of church
members, particularly in Johannesruh, there was persistent and noticeable
decline in good conduct, Christian piety, and the effort to attain true,
imperishable treasure. In their concern they turned to the many
handwritten books they possessed. Not a few of these were historical

writings from Reformation times. Many of the books pointed to
community of goods as the only way to salvation. It is therefore
understandable that the best among the settlers hoped to find in this
practice the only means of successfully resisting the weakening influences
in their church. One after another, twenty-three householders joined
together. Debts they owed to each other were canceled, and debts to those
outside were paid from the common purse.
In Johannesruh, the church members changed one of their houses into
a meetinghouse, another into a dining room for the men, a third into a
dining room for the women and girls, a fourth into a children's house, and
so on. In the same way, communal workshops were set up for carpenters,
smiths, and others. Each trade had its own workshop.
Every evening the whole community gathered for prayer. Every man
and boy, woman and girl, was given a particular task and occupation. At
the head of every branch of the communal work was a brother or sister as
overseer. The considerable distances lying between the scattered houses
and farm buildings, and the conversion of each house to a special purpose
brought no small difficulties to the community members and resulted in
waste. Many houses stood empty and some had unused space, while others
did not have enough. Completely new buildings were necessary, or at least
the old ones needed alteration. The brothers were convinced that the
salvation of their souls was at stake. In such cases, if those carrying out
the projects are completely sincere and honest in their motives, it is
possible to undertake and accomplish things which would be impossible
under other circumstances.
Quite a few members of the new community were well aware how
awkward the situation was, but they nonetheless submitted without protest.
Others saw the drastic changes to their property as only a means, an
outward alteration with the purpose of restoring the group to what they
regarded as true Christianity. These now turned their attention particularly
to the children's education. But in spite of all kinds of suggestions and
consultations, the group could not come to a united decision about
anything vital. The women in particular showed little inclination for
communal life. To overcome their resistance, a resort to coercive measures

had to be made at every step. As a result, the arrangements were devoid of
all suitability and practicability.
Obviously, the reform in methods of property holding did not of itself
bring the hoped-for result of richer blessing to the members' souls. Many
of the most sincere men failed to find the expected moral compensation
either for the personal rights they had given up or for the material
advantages they had sacrificed in order to start the community. Little by
little, they were overcome by the conviction that nothing was achieved by
simply holding all material goods in common, and that true community
could not be established for the time being since the members are not
permeated by the Holy Spirit.
***************

1868 Community dissolved
Others finally gave up hope for the moral rebirth of their
brotherhood. All this led the brothers of their own free will to dissolve the
communities in Johannesruh and Huttertal. They returned to living as
separate families on individual farms.
In summer 1868, directly after the holy celebration of Pentecost when in the first years of the Christian era the early church was gathered
and was drawn strongly together through the power of the Holy Spirit - our
community members divided up the property between them. It is actually
praiseworthy and speaks in favor of these brothers that the division took
place without quarrels or disputes, although many householders had lost a
considerable part of their property and would never have it replaced.
Samuel Kleinsasser, however, continued to live in community and so
did the minister David Hofer (Davidl). They went on living in Huttertal,
but in spirit they were with Michel Waldner's community in Hutterdorf.
Both Huttertal brothers urged Michel Waldner's community to sell their
farmland in Hutterdorf and move to a new place, for they realized it was

very difficult to continue with community of goods in a village where
others retained private property.
As a result, Michel Waldner's community sold the colony in
Hutterdorf and built a new one suited to community requirements, on a
piece of land about 10 miles [16 km] away. Samuel Kleinsasser and his
family then moved to this colony, which was called Scheromet. The
minister David Hofer died in 1868, before the move to the new place. He
was sixty-seven years old.
The members of Michel Waldner's congregation continued to live in
complete community in Scheromet until they were led to the United
States.
***************

1870 Generous privileges came to end
A report has already been given of the great inner difficulties with
which the Hutterian brothers had to struggle. The principle of communal
ownership had resulted in failure: only two communities remained faithful
to the orders and institutions given by our forefathers for community of
goods. The fragmentation seemed to indicate another collapse. Then the
Russian government delivered a hard blow to the Mennonites, and so to
the Hutterites, who were officially counted as Mennonites, and our
forefathers were compelled to unite their forces to confront the evil that
threatened them.
The Russian Empire was adopting a new home policy aimed at
complete Russification. In 1870, a decree from Alexander II announced
that the era of generous privileges and favors to colonists was at an end;
the Guardians' Committee at Odessa was to be dissolved, and from now
on, the colonists would be ruled directly from St. Petersburg. Russian was
to be the official language in local government and a compulsory subject
in schools; all German schools were to be under the supervision of the
Imperial Ministry of Education. Freedom from military service was to

come to an end. Colonists were granted a ten-year period in which to
conform to the new regulations. At the end of this period, they would be
counted as Russian citizens in every respect, with exactly the same rights
and duties. The Hutterites and also the Mennonites had believed that the
promises made them by the Empress Catherine II on July 22, 1763, would
have perpetual validity. They counted on the continuation of the exemption
from military service and the retention of all privileges granted to them by
Czar Paul I and confirmed by Czar Alexander I in 1801.
Fears began to be expressed among the German colonists that the
Russian government intended this decree as a means of eradicating the
German language from the colonies - the only language they felt they
could use for religious matters - and making the colonists into members of
the Greek Orthodox church. They saw that their language, customs, and
religious beliefs were threatened; and that the Mennonites together with
the Hutterites, who in this case were working with them, were facing
destruction. Therefore, they immediately began, by means of petitions and
interviews, to seek exemption from the law of 1870. The Hutterites sent
three representatives to St. Petersburg - Paul Tschetter, Michel Stahl, and
Jakob Wipf - but their efforts were useless.
In July 1873, George Hofer, Darius Walter, and his son-in-law, Joseph
Hofer, a young man of thirty-four, were sent from the colony of Hutterdorf
to St. Petersburg to petition the government to continue the various
exemptions granted to the colonies.
***************

1873 Diary: A journey to Petersburg
Extracts from: The Diary of Joseph Yos Hofer *
July 19 – November 8 1873

WEDNSDAY, July 19
At 10 o'clock in the forenoon, we journeyed forth, committed to God,
from the congregation of the Lord, Hutterdorf first with earnest petitions
and entreaties to God for fortune and blessings that he will be with us on
the way and from place to place. We came to our brothers in (Scheromet)
and strengthened ourselves in the plan before us. We left from there,
committed to God, at 3 o'clock in the afternoon....

THURSDAY, JULY 20 1873
We traveled from there under God's protection, fresh and well, and
arrived at Polngrad about noon. We heard that quite a bit of sickness
prevailed there and that up to 20 people died in one day.... From there we
drove away and came to the village Wasillowka. ... In this village, the
sickness raged strongly. It was only a small village and the people said that
up to 40 people had died in one day.
One could sense fear among the brethren because we had such a long
trip before us in such a dangerous time. Still, we strengthened ourselves in
the Lord, and continued our trip, praise God, in the early morning, happy,
safe and sound, with renewed courage.

FRIDAY, JULY 21
We came to the railroad in Lasawatka and had to wait until 12:00
midnight. Then we took leave of the brethren who had brought us and rode
on very swiftly, without stopping, so that one's hair stood on end with
astonishment over traveling at such a speed. Within an hour we had flown
over twentyfive versts [fifteen miles] when we came to another train
station. After five minutes we left again.... We placed our trust in God and
always prayed for his gracious presence.

SATURDAY, JULY 22
At 12 o'clock noon we came to the city of Belgarad.... After 10
minutes we departed and at 4:00 in the afternoon, safe and sound, we
arrived in Kurski.
In the train station, the baggage was transferred. That went fast. Here
we secured a ticket to Moscow and continued our journey. At 12:00
midnight we arrived at Arell. After several minutes we drove on from
there. ... In the pitch dark night, we went by fields and meadow, bridges
and dams, forests and swamps, without stopping. (We came) to a watch
post, where a man stood by the door of a little house with a light. In one
hand he held a small flag that he raised up, and in the other hand he held a
blast horn.

SUNDAY, JULY 23
We arrived in Tula at 8 o'clock in the morning at an extraordinary
train station with exceptional splendor and pomp, so that one had to look
at it with wonder. Building such a train station doesn't save any money.
After 10 minutes, we left Tula. We crossed over an iron bridge that
spans the water: a wonderfully nice bridge and so very high that man is
speechless over the marvel. We came to Moscow at 3 o'clock in the
afternoon, safe and sound - God be praised for it.
A big and, above measure, nice city: horribly large, magnificent
buildings, and everything clean. The people told us that we had driven
through the least part of it. This railroad ended here. We had to hire a man
with a carriage who took us to the assigned train station, which was about
three versts away. We paid him 50 kopeks, and we arrived there safely.
There we again secured a ticket and left at 6 o'clock in the afternoon, in
the peace of God.
We came to a bridge over the water Msta which is made entirely of
iron. It was very high, thirty-eight faden, (a faden is seven feet), so that

when one looked down, fear and terror came over one and almost made
one dizzy. Whoever has not seen it can hardly believe it is possible to
build a bridge so high. The train traveled over it so slowly that an ox could
follow. It must be a dangerous experience to travel from Moscow to
Petersburg.
Learned also that the Czar is not at home, for traveling with us were
two soldiers who were taking back his horse, which he had wanted to take
with him, but had changed his mind. They were decent people and said
that a man could, and was allowed to, freely come to the Czar with
petitions....
The people living between Moscow and Petersburg appeared to us to
be poor, for there are only miserable villages and unkept yards without
plan. The whole land and region is nothing but swamps and forests, and we
saw very little agriculture; the land doesn't produce without manure, the
people said.

MONDAY, JULY 24
We arrived at 6 o'clock in the afternoon in the great and wonderfully
beautiful city, Petersburg ... for which we thanked God in heaven, that he
kept us from all need and sustained us with good health in soul and body.

TUESDAY, JULY 25
We rested after such a long journey and went nowhere. Though the
trip went very well, it was very tiring, for we continued day and night
without stopping. We were crowded among great masses of people.
Always at each station there was a stop of from five to ten minutes, so that
one could leave for necessary purposes. All the coming and going makes
everyone restless. One has to be careful that nothing is pulled away or
stolen ... especially when traveling in third class.

Upon our arrival in Petersburg we rented quarters, for 75 kopeks.

WEDNESDAY AND THURSDAY, JULY 26 and 27
We acquainted ourselves with the streets and looked at the
magnificent buildings near the Czar's palace, with its great size and
splendor. It is a big building, without end. It is, however, only three stories
high. One of the wings is four stories high. It has so many figurines and
human images standing around it and so many chimneys that a man can't
count them. ... The area covered by the building is a good dessiatine.
Quite a distance from the gate stands a big high marble statue and up
on the top, a man's image with two wings lifted into the air besides a
wreath. The people call it an angel, but I don't understand that, for the
angels are ministering spirits from God and not standing on a dead marble
stone.
Here also are the houses of the other princes.
Constantine's is much more magnificent than the Czar's, and is build
with nice glistening marble from the foundation on up.
The late Czar Paul's palace is quite a distance away - about half a
verst. None of the Czar's family lives in it. No doubt there is a reason for
this.
During this time we looked into how we could live the cheapest in the
city. We also realized we will have to stay here a long time - the first
reason being that the Czar is not at home.

FRIDAY AND SATURDAY, JULY 28 AND 29
We rented quarters from the same innkeeper for 16 rubles per month.
He has to supply us hot water once daily for tea drinking. He gave us a
different room than the one we had - a small room that was beside it; so

small it was almost too small. We helped ourselves with it, however,
because he wanted 22 rubles per month for the other one.
Wrote home also to our dear brothers and sisters about our situation,
and what it costs us daily for nourishment - at the very cheapest it comes
to 60 kopeks. But at this time we still had some meat from home as well as
bread.

SUNDAY, JULY 30
Went to the Catholic church with my father-in-law. We had thought it
was a Lutheran church. There I saw the unspeakable blasphemy of God of
the oral confession and sins forgiven according to their manner, which was
thought up by the devil. There sat an old snow-white man in an enclosure
who on occasion would take a quick view of the people and then always
quickly hide behind a white shawl and act as if he were crying. He always
covered his face with his hands but the wickedness shone through his eyes.
If one wanted to confess his sins, he went to the enclosure and knelt
down and stayed there kneeling until he with his covered face turned his
ear to him - which took over an hour. - until it was agreeable or pleasing to
him, and then the confession continued, which took at least a good quarter
of an hour. Then he gave him something in his mouth. Then the repentant
one kissed his hands - he probably wasn't qualified to kiss his mouth - then
bowed himself down to the ground several times, and then he was free
from his sins.
Oh, how furious and greatly inflamed I was in my spirit! I wanted to
cry out over such villains and trickery. May God guard his small group
from such mistaken teaching in these last days.
***************

1873 Diary continued/Very little hope

MONDAY, JULY 31
We sat by the Neva river beside the Czar's courtyard and looked at the
big building and talked, full of worries about our bad situation. When we
asked other people for help, they didn't care to get involved, shook their
head and said it would be no use. There came to us a man from Finland
who knew a little German. He asked us where we came from, to which we
said we were from the Taurida government.
Thereupon he asked why we had undertaken such a long journey.
Because this man seemed a decent, friendly man, we risked telling him our
situation and said we were worthy of good advice. He asked in what area?
Then we told him what he already knew, what we wanted to do with our
petition addressed to the Czar.
Then we asked whether he would be so good as to let us come before
the Czar. Then he said that in such matters he wasn't knowledgeable, but
he knew a man he could recommend to us. This man, he assured us, could
help us. He understands such things well, is a born German, named
Sernhart. If it is agreeable to us, he would take us to him immediately.
We considered this among ourselves, pondering that one can't see into
a man's heart. We thought he was too friendly and too quick to agree. He
said we need have no fear of him and should only accompany him, and he
won't require any pay for his trouble. We went with him to the man, who
hadn't yet come to his office. He would be coming soon, however. We
waited a good hour. When we went back, he was there already.
When we told the man what we wanted, we didn't have our petition
with us. He said we should come tomorrow at 12:00 and bring the petition
with us. Then he would give us further advice. We said farewell and went
to our quarters.

TUESDAY, AUGUST I

Took our petition and went back to give it to Sernhart. He looked at it
some, and told us to come tomorrow at 12:00. With sighs we returned to
our quarters.

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 2
Returned again as he had told us. He told us our petition was very
good and he couldn't better anything nor add to it; he said only a grammar
teacher could improve it a little, and that he would do that for us. Decided
we would again go to our quarters. We couldn't talk anymore with him
because we really didn't know what he would do with our petition. ... We
had no less than four versts to walk to get to our quarters. We were to
return again on Friday.

THURSDAY, AUGUST 3
Stayed the whole day in our quarters and were in great
discouragement and in sorrow over our situation. This much we could see
- to this man it appeared to be a difficult and troublesome matter which he
didn't care to tackle. It appeared difficult to everyone in government.

FRIDAY, AUGUST 4
We again went to Sernhart's office, where we had left our petition
addressed to the Czar. We asked about our matter and he replied that his
task with the petition had indeed been carried out, but that he had left it at
home.
It seemed to us that he wasn't completely truthful. We judged that he
must have given it to another man, for our petition and religion, which he
gleaned from our petition, was very striking to him, which led to an
important conversation.

He asked about our whole situation: communal living and how it is
carried out, about baptism, communion, Christ, bearing arms, why we
don't tolerate businessmen among us, the sanctity of Marriage, how
Marriage is arranged, by what method our ministers get their position. We
witnessed and gave an answer on every point.
Lastly, as we saw that he was very curious, we told him we had our
Articles of Faith with us in our quarters, and if it pleased him, we would
make it available to him with the promise that he would give it back
without sharing it with others, because without doubt we would find it
necessary to have it for our presentation. He gave us the highest
affirmation and assurance to honor this condition and asked us to bring it
to him....

SATURDAY, AUGUST 5
Went again to Sernhart's office. After greetings, he immediately
spoke to us about our petition and said the task was completely carried out
and that we could now take our petition along with us. He had improved it
and gave it to us. As we then looked at what he had done, we saw it was
very insignificant.
Thereupon we begged him, for the sake of God's will, to tell us the
truth - if it is actually good enough to give to the Czar as we were
determined to do. We had thought he would write a completely new
petition.
He answered that he wanted no money from us without a good reason.
... Then he assured us that for our purpose and situation it can't be
improved. Our plea and what we ask of the highness of the Czar is
completely expressed therein. He told us we can appear with it boldly
before the Czar. This really is the only way left, for it would be all in vain
to go through the minister and the other high officials....
We asked him again if one can hand it in to the Czar upon ordinary
paper. He answered that there was nothing to fear about this - only it

should be nicely written on sturdy white paper, in German, and given
boldly.
We asked him if it wouldn't be a mistake to hand it in written in the
German language. He said it wasn't. Rather it would be better, for not
everyone need know what it says. He told us now it should be rewritten
word for word and then we could come to him and he would examine it
and give further instruction about how to appear before the Czar. It is a
difficult thing - an almost impossible thing - for the dignitaries are very
cautious in such matters.
We then gave him our Articles of Faith and asked him what we owed
him for his troubles. He answered that when he has so little trouble he
didn't want to take anything. We replied that he should only ask for
something and we would gladly pay for it - otherwise, we would not feel
free to come to him. His answer still was that he didn't want anything. He
said we could come anytime and if his work amounts to something, then
he would take pay.
For now you could offer me a thousand rubles and I couldn't add
anything, he said. Your petition would no doubt also have to be examined
by your congregation and then approved. How could I add or take away
anything? It is not a process that one can improve an Article that is good
and understandable. It is a childlike, submissive petition.
Troubled and with sighs flowing to God, we went to our quarters and
unceasingly begged God that he would help us in our situation and
strengthen us in our grief, and fear, and need.

SUNDAY, AUGUST 6
We so longed to go to the Moravian Brethren church, but it rained the
whole day and we couldn't. Our quarters are at the least four versts away.
Stayed the whole day in our quarters and occupied ourselves in the Word
of God, and considered the great steadfastness of God. Comforted and
strengthened ourselves in the Lord.

MONDAY, AUGUST 7
Nothing else was left for us except to prepare to write and rewrite our
petition with the greatest of care.
We were very close to a fire station. Every day thus far there has been
a fire in the city; it is nothing new for fire to break out. We always knew
about it because of the terrible bell clanging. In a few minutes the fire
company is in full swing, on their feet, and hurriedly prepared for fighting
the flames.

TUESDAY, AUGUST 8
We again went to the man with whom we had left our Articles of
Faith. Was not in his office, however. His secretary told us he was away on
a good deal of business. Because of this, be so good to come at another
time, she told us.
Went then to see the city somewhat and came alongside the Neva. Its
shores are strong, two faden (fourteen feet) above the water. The sides of
the shoreline are lined with the very hardest rock. The buildings of the
Czar's families are built alongside the Neva - the most splendid and
magnificent buildings man can possibly produce.
Oh, what there are of drawings and pictures, so that it is more heathen
than Christian. Pride is driven to the highest peak. There is also a ... bridge
over the Neva - one that is made very well - beautiful, strong, wide, high,
clean, and with the strongest of guards, whose purpose it is to protect the
bridge. The bridge is, so to say, one that could be considered one of the
wonders of the world. It is extraordinary in stature and beauty. There are
also some swim bridges on the other side.
There are also practical buildings. There is the church where all the
Czars lie buried. Oh, how they lie in there in such great pride and worldly

glory - and everything adorned with pure gold. The gravestones are from
genuine, milk-white marble that glitters like crystal. On top above each
casket is a big golden cross. ... Here also is strong security. In the church
there is much pomp and splendor, pictures and paintings.
Not very far away from this church, there is also a terrible prison
fortress. When I asked what this was, a man told me it was a secure place
of confinement. This prison is for noble people and their descendants.
Here security is so strict that one is not allowed to go near.

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 9
Went nowhere today and remained in our quarters. Had no ambition
to walk around in the city for we were very homesick. We occupied
ourselves with the Word of God and his grace, which was the most
beneficial in our day full of grief. We discussed various methods that we
could use to carry out our business most suitably....
Oh, dear brothers, I can't at all say how I long for home, for one day
in this city is longer than a whole year among brothers and sisters. We
would willingly trade. Oh, how everything here is running toward hell the shepherd with the sheep, the judge with those he judges, the townsman
with the peasant farmer. He who doesn't want to believe the world is lost
should drive here and look. Then he would talk differently and, as a result,
be able to judge.

TUESDAY, AUGUST 10
Went again to the man to whom we had given our Articles of Faith.
He was not in his office. He came soon, however, and gave the Articles of
Faith to us, but he didn't say one word about how they appealed to him.
The reason may have been that he was greatly pressured by a backlog of
people. It may also have been that our witness may have been a sting
shining too clearly in his eyes. Because of this, we didn't want to ask him

explicitly about the Articles because we saw he was overwhelmed with his
business.
This man is very busy and always has masses of people around him.
We always wished that we could find him alone, but that has been
impossible up to now. He is, however, a sensible, friendly man, little of
speech, and of the Lutheran confession....
***************

1873 Hofers diary continues/petition translated
FRIDAY, AUGUST 11
I went alone to the man who had our petition addressed to the Czar.
We had improved and rewritten it according to his advice. I went,
however, on a completely different street to view other buildings. I went
on the street known as Sadawga. There I came upon a very large
marketplace. In this marketplace everything is to be had. There is a flower
section; whatever kind or species one could think of was there. All were in
pots or wooden trays. Also clothes, old and new, boots, shoes. Apples - so
many I have never seen in my life - watermelons, muskmelons, grapes, as
if they were still hanging on the vine, and pears of all species. Everything
was not very expensive. Ten really nice middle-sized apples for 15 kopeks;
a nice middle-sized watermelon was from 25 to 40 kopeks. Naturally, there
are those exceptions among them who deal differently. Of them I will say
nothing.
Any kind of hardware was available. ... Fish, all kinds, alive and dead,
for they have several vessels in which they have the fish where fresh water
always flows from a fountain. The fish, however, are costly. ... From there,
I went on without trying anything with the exception of a glass of kvass (a
mild Russian beer) which was available at more places.
I came to a beautiful, large yard, and the gate was open. Then I took
the liberty to go into the yard. Oh, there was a wonderfully beautiful,

cheerful yard and garden. I asked a man if one could visit this garden.
Then he, who was the yardman, answered, A stranger like you can. Then I
went in. Oh, that was a lovely pleasure.
In the middle of the garden was a fountain from which water spouted
not less than four faden (twenty-eight feet) high. Around the fountain was
a beautiful pond about a dessiatine in size. Around the pond stood large
beautiful trees, but no fruit trees. Then I asked the man if there are any
fish in this pond, to which he answered yes, very many.
From there, I directed my way to my business and followed the street
along the Neva River. There were different kinds of ships present, like a
forest. All were crown (government) ships, magnificently adorned and
polished up according to their use in the world....
Then I came to our court where we had our papers. The man was in
his office already. After a friendly greeting, he gave me the petition and
said that now it is good and he would now permit us to hand it to the Czar,
but he added the Czar was not at home. I asked him if he had heard
anything about when he would come. His replied he didn't know, and had
not heard anything, but said the Czar might return by late August.
An old man was there, who presumed knowledge of the petition on
the table and of our request. He asked about our presentation of the
petition and how one deals with it with the secretary. He advised us that we
should hand it over to Prince Dolhiruszi because it is very difficult
personally to hand petitions to the Czar himself. We would hardly be able
to accomplish that because of the ceremonial pomp, splendor, and
protection that surround a sovereign. ... The old man said that even if we
handed the petition to the Czar personally, it would still end up in the
hands of the named prince. I said we would decide what to do ourselves.
The man seemed to me to be a German, but spoke only Russian. I
asked the secretary if we were finished with our petition so that it could be
handed in. Shouldn't there be an address of our quarters on the bottom? He
said that wasn't necessary and would be taken care of when handed in.

We said good-bye and went to our quarters. After much deliberation
we agreed that we couldn't completely disregard the man's suggestion. We
would wait until we had word from our brothers. Maybe they will write us
something important and send us some good counsel. Committed our
situation to the all-wise God in heaven, accepted patience for our task,
strengthened and comforted ourselves in the Lord, and thanked him for
protection....

SUNDAY, AUGUST 13
My father-in-law and I went to the Reformed Church, a big, high,
towered building. Above the entrance to the church was written, Jesus
Christ, yesterday, today, and into eternity. Went up the steps and were
directed to seats by the doorkeepers. No one was there yet and it took quite
a long time until the people had gathered. Last came the pastor and then
began the worship with a very loud organ playing. The song Children of
the Highest, how is it with your love? was sung. Have to say, though, that
most, or all, was organ playing. After the end of singing, which consisted
of four verses, the pastor arose and prayed beside the pulpit.
Then he stepped up to the pulpit and took Paul's epistle to Philemon
for a text and read the whole chapter, word for word from a Bible, and then
he prayed. Then he interpreted the Word, which was not to be looked down
upon. He divided the epistle into three parts. First, he explained who Paul
was and how greatly he treasured the grace that he and other people had
experienced. Second, he placed Philemon and Onesimus on the same level
and knew no preference and stood by him - God sees them as on the same
level.
He had a long explanation about the word brethren and what Paul
understood about it; also, what is implied by brothers and sisters and what
freedom it brings one to another. He brought it to the point where they lay
down their life for one another. He spoke much less about sharing money
and property.

The third point was how the lords should conduct themselves toward
their servants. He said they should take an example from the epistle by
Paul and not drive their servants so hard, as one so often sees it.
After such a sermon, which took about two hours, he prayed aloud,
and then silently, while sitting on the stage with his hands over his face.
After this he spoke the blessing of Moses and this completed his message.
Then the very loud organ started playing again so that the windows rattled.

MONDAY, AUGUST 14
Received our loving, anticipated letter from home at 4 o'clock in the
afternoon, about which we rejoiced greatly. We opened it eagerly. Through
this we saw that everything at home was getting along well, and that they
were fortunate, for which we thanked God....

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 16
Went to see whether Pastor Haus had come yet from his trip abroad.
After we asked about him, the grandmaster told us he should arrive on the
20th. Information had first arrived that he would come on September 3.
He asked us where we were from. We told him and also the reason for
our being here. We also asked if he had heard anything about our case. He
answered that this question of military service is all decided and that all
are under universal compulsory service and would be drafted.
This man seemed to us to be completely of a careless and carnal
mind. We could tell this by his words and behavior. As we left for our
quarters, he spoke laughingly that being a soldier was not all that bad
anymore, rather a sign of complete enlightenment....

THURSDAY, AUGUST 17

Saw a criminal being condemned. Was so terrible to see that my
whole body trembled. Oh, how the criminal stood in desperation, chained
to a post with thousands of people watching. It was a young man who
wanted to force himself into a regiment and claimed to be of the Czar's
lineage. Had lied about everything and wanted to create only rumor and
rebellion. The Apostle Paul says, not in vain, If you do not want to fear the
government, then do good.

SUNDAY, AUGUST 20
My father-in-law and I went to the Lutheran church. Could not
understand a single word for he preached in a foreign language. They said
that the people were Icelandic. The people in the church appeared to me to
be poor, clothed very simply and plain, even though they had the mode of
the world. Their poverty was obvious, though.

MONDAY, AUGUST 21
Went to the man to whom we had given our petition to translate from
the German language into Russian four days ago. He said he hadn't
translated it yet and wouldn't be able to do it any sooner than next Sunday.
He also said he wouldn't translate it word for word, but would shorten it.
Then we said we would not wish it translated differently than word for
word. ... He promised us he would have it ready by the coming Sunday....

FRIDAY, AUGUST 25
Were in the city at various places for this day was celebrated as the
Czar's Coronation Day. In various places there were provisions for
pleasure and enjoyment. By chance we came to Peter the Great's Park. Oh,
how the park was prepared; clean and handsome, and with ... clever
torches and preparations for lighting lights. Thousands of glass ornaments

and crystals hung there along the sides and on trees to enhance the lights,
flowers, wreaths, and various statues....

MONDAY, AUGUST 28
The Huttertal delegation came to us in our quarters and gave us
greetings and a letter from the brothers....

TUESDAY AND WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 29 AND 30
We stayed in our quarters and discussed with our guests our coming
here and our purpose in the city of Petersburg. They demanded, with
pressure, that we come to the Czar together with one petition. After this,
we presented the petition that we had brought along from home. They
could not complain about it, except for the points dealing with community,
and commented that these would not need to be taken out or to be
discarded. But they didn't see themselves included in it. Thereupon, the
discussion ended, and we couldn't come to one mind. Things stayed as
they were.

SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 3
We stayed in our quarters and were agreed that the eldest should go
home, because it is too costly to nourish three men. The people tell us the
Czar will not come yet for a long time. (Darius Walter went home.)

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 6
Went for our petition, which we had translated from German to
Russian. We received it finished from the translator.

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 7
The Huttertalers left for home around 3:30 in the afternoon....

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 13
Went to the city again in order to ask about the Czar's arrival and
asked such persons that should have such knowledge. Said that he would
not come this month.... We learned he won't come for a long time yet, and
that the Czar is on his estate in the Crimea. Oh, how we were discouraged
over such disappointing news. We do not want to go home without
accomplishing something.
***************

1873 Hofer's Diary continued/waiting for the Czar
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 14
Did not go anywhere. Rather, we stayed in our quarters. Our total
effort was to strengthen ourselves in the faith through the Word of God
and through the dear, old, ancient songs left to us. We have fallen into a
great dilemma because we don't know how to accomplish our purpose in
being here. We don't know how we can best be useful to the community.
Only one man has taken up our cause for us; we will go to him on
Friday when he will lead us to the Czar's secretary to see what he would
say about our business here. We were agreed to go to this person for
counsel.
We commit the cares of our dear brothers, because of our absence
from home, to the dear Father in heaven, who knows best our diligent and

well-meaning effort, and who can carry it out best. It will also be to his
name's praise, glory, and honor. Therein we always comfort ourselves. For
the Lord hides himself for a time behind a blind, but is always prepared to
help, which we have experienced several times.

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 18
We drove to see the Czar's secretary and happened to meet him, but
accomplished nothing for he is a very wicked man. This same day the
Mennonites came to us in our quarters and had various questions for us
about the present situation, the Articles of Faith, and asked whether we
would be willing to show them the petition we wanted to give the Czar. We
couldn't deny them this and showed it to them. This they read aloud in our
presence, but said nothing and found no fault with it.

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19
We again made inquiry at various places about our matter and about
the Czar's arrival, but could determine nothing for certain. We became
very troubled. Every person we asked about our business said it was in
vain and for naught. We wondered ourselves and came completely to the
end of our hope.

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 20
The Mennonites, who were of the Kleine Gemeinde, came again to us
and said they had been at Senator Han. He said that he felt very sorry for
them for having come from so far with all that expense because it is
completely in vain and for nothing. The Czar will come no sooner than 14
days. To give him a petition is a difficult thing and would without doubt
result in their getting into the hands of the police and in prison.

They were told it would not help to hand the petition personally to
him for he knows everything without their petition.

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 21
In the evening, I went to the mentioned Kleine Gemeinder, and they
remarked that they did not know if the Molotschner (Mennonites) were
coming. As we were speaking, they came in the door. But of the impending
matter nothing was said, and in about an hour's time they went to their
quarters.

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 22
Didn't go anywhere for the Mennonites were with us and various
things were discussed. They were not subtle men; rather, they agreed with
us in all points and said they were more at peace with us and had more
confidence in us than in the Molotschners.

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 23
They came again and said that the Polar (Mennonites) had come
already, too, and that they had talked to them themselves, and that they had
even come to the Molotschners in their quarters.
Then I asked them their opinion about our situation, and urged them
to speak freely about it.
They said they didn't know. They read their petition and according to
their judgment it was good, for there was nothing in it to indicate they
wanted to compromise.

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 25
We went to visit the Polars and found them in their quarters. After we
had greeted each other, much was discussed about our and their presence
here. From here we went to the Molotschner quarters.
The Kleine Gemeinder were already by us, so we went together to the
Polars, to discern their minds. But nothing was spoken about the situation
at hand.
***************

1873 Hofer's Diary continued/unable to meet with Czar
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 27
At 8 o'clock in the morning we went to Klaus and took along our
petition. We found him at home. As soon as we arrived, he immediately
allowed us to come before him. He introduced himself and asked us why
we came to him. We told him our concern and request. Then he asked us if
we were the Hutterian Brethren, to which we answered in the affirmative.
After he had asked us a few questions about certain things, we gave him
our petition, which he immediately read with curiosity, and he asked if we
had any more papers with us. We answered that we had others along, but
they were in our quarters. Then he told us he had no more time to speak
with us, but that he needed to be at the Ministerium. We should, however,
come to him in the evening at 6 o'clock with all our papers; then he would
acquaint himself further with our matter.
At 6:00 we met him with our papers. He called us to his room right
away and told us to be seated. He inspected our papers and said he would
examine the Russian version. We were to buy an old Russian Bible and
also a book he designated, with which he could best make our matter clear
to the government. He said he would use his power to our benefit. Then he
started questioning.

He and his wife sat down in front of us and questioned everything so
accurately that we wondered about it - from the least to the greatest. We
gave them an answer to everything, even to our cost of living. We had to
tell him everything that we eat at every meal for a whole week. One can't
believe how much interest this love-worthy man had on our behalf.
He even asked how one gets married: Could one get married at one's
pleasure and as one pleases? We told him only upon the counsel of the
older brethren and at their discernment could a Marriage occur. Then his
wife said that up to this point everything appealed to her very much, but
with this she couldn't agree. But as we explained the reason for this she
remarked that in communal living it can't be different because one can't
allow anyone to be despised or discriminated against.
After he had inquired about everything, he said that for the present,
this inquiry was enough. We begged him to take on our matter. He then
said he would be as helpful as possible. We thanked him for his goodness.
... Our hearts were much lighter for it appeared he would take on our
difficult matter.

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 28
We drove to a bookstore for a Bible but there wasn't any like the one
we wanted. Rather they were in church print. We bought the other book
Klaus designated for 4 rubles bound.
At 6 o'clock in the evening we again went to him and told him that we
had purchased the books he designated, but that they wouldn't be ready
until the following Monday. The Bible didn't appeal to us because it was in
church print. He said that would be fine, for it would be better than the
fine print. We must bring it, for he must have it to revise the Articles of
Faith.

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 29

We drove again to the Sinnedalin Book Concern for a Bible and
bought one which cost 3 rubles, 90 kopeks.
The Kleine Gemeinder came to visit us every day and told us of their
discussions with the other Mennonites and appeared to us to be sincere.
They asked us for our Articles of Faith, which we gave them. When they
returned them two days later we asked them how they appealed to them.
They answered that they could not exclude anything, but if their hearts
said the same thing we couldn't know.
After listening to many long Scripture passages (seeking to justify
private property), I said I understood this matter with a completely
different mind. God protect me from a different mind and understanding
and thereby try to justify private ownership.
For when Paul commanded the rich of this world that they give
gladly, it is clear enough that he doesn't mean a brother, but one who is an
unconverted rich person of this world....

MONDAY, OCTOBER 2
We got the book that we were having bound and brought it to Klaus in
the evening. We found him at home and after greetings we began to talk
about our matter with him. He told us that he had spoken with the proper
people on our behalf and that the matter is in a bad state. Military service
for all is a settled matter; as for civil service there is nothing more to be
done except to rent land. Then we would be free from civil service. But, he
said, military service still always remains unavoidable.
We replied that we cannot perform either military or civil service
according to our Articles of Faith, which are directed by the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. In no way can we serve, and
with the help of God, we won't. Until the present day, we haven't submitted
as other nonresistant brotherhoods unfortunately have, and that makes our
burden much harder. Then he showed us a book which permits man the use
of arms and weapons - this by a Mennonite. He starts with the words of

Paul: Prove all things; hold fast to that which is good. Abstain from all
appearance of evil.
Then we answered that this man was not a Mennonite - much less a
follower of Jesus Christ. We would not take our teaching from this book
and will in all simplicity stay by the teaching of Jesus Christ and his
apostles, who forbid all revenge and ownership rights here on this earth,
and who said that the servant is not greater than his Master or Lord.
Then he said, You speak words that are too deep, to which I replied,
My dearest friend, you can only believe that for over two months already,
time has indeed become long, and we would gladly be with our family. It
would be much easier on our physical being if we would place ourselves
equal with the world and would indeed do as others and manage to get
along. We wouldn't need to be here for so long a time, hovering in trouble,
fear, and need, but for Christ and his truth's sake we are prepared to endure
whatever comes. For we know of no other way to follow and witness than
the one that Christ and his apostles did before us, and if it comes to giving
our life, with God's help, we are prepared for that. If we would now follow
the proposal of the government, we would have no salvation, and our
consciences would condemn us. So, it is better to die honestly with a
peaceful conscience than to live with a condemned conscience and, at the
end, not to escape the hand of the Lord. Rather, we would have to appear
before the judgment seat of God.
He said if the whole country would so believe, then the other
countries would come and take everything under their domination. We
answered that if God would wish that to happen, then God would also care
and provide. One shouldn't believe that sword and weapons enlarge
kingdoms; rather, the Lord places empires in and out of power. The Lord,
ever since the beginning, has had two sorts of people, and so it will be
until the end of the world.
Then he said that Paul said government is of God and man is to be
subject to it, and so we should rightly examine our speech and our task.
Then we told him we have been in Russia for a hundred years already, and
have never disobeyed the government, have never taken an oath, and have
paid our taxes and dues faithfully and willingly. We always regarded the

government with honor in everything and without jesting. But if it comes
to conscience and our faith, we say with Peter, that we are more
responsible to God than to man.
Then he asked if we would nevertheless be able to pay protection
money? We said that we are prepared to pay yearly taxes, be it as much as
you want, if we can afford it; but as to buying ourselves free from the
shedding of blood with money, this we cannot do, even if it is very little.
Then he took our Articles of Faith and read the article about
government, laughed about it, and said that for us, there is nothing that can
be done.
He is going to have the Articles recopied and would prepare them so
they would be presentable to the Czar. By himself he had much sympathy
for us, he said, but couldn't help us for you are in a sorry situation.
In Russia there will be no more exemption; there has to be military
service. We told him we indeed know that he could promise us no rights.
Also, we ourselves, as we left from home, imagined we would not be able
to work out much by way of exemptions. We were merely sent to present
our petition and Articles of Faith to the government, and then await what
God would permit to come upon us.
We asked him to be helpful in presenting it to-the right place,
according to the law. He promised to do that. He asked if we had power of
attorney from the brotherhood. We informed him that we had, but it was in
our quarters. We were told to bring it in the morning.

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 4
Didn't go anywhere. Rather, stayed in our quarters the whole day with
afflicted hearts, for all the other delegations had gone home and we still
had to stay here. Klaus told us to wait for the Czar, who would come
October 15. Then we were to take our papers to him and he would have
something to say about it. In the meantime, we are to present our petition

and the Articles of Faith to the one next to the Czar. ... That way, when it is
handed to the Czar, the minister will already know about the matter.

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 5
I again went to Klaus, to see how it is with our situation. After we had
greeted each other he told me to be seated and said he had prepared a
petition for the minister. He read it to me and I couldn't point out anything,
only that he had separated us completely from those who are in private
ownership. He pointed out our leaving Huttertal and the reason, as well as
the separation from Hutterdorf, and thirdly, the land at Scheromet and
Atrischka, which was bought for communal living purposes. He centered
our request on our Articles of Faith. Then toward the last he stated that we
never allow taking an oath, or doing civil or military duty, or paying
money for exemptions. He stated that we are willing to pay our yearly
taxes or poll taxes as levied. He then asked me if we are satisfied with this
petition.
I asked him if it was separated enough from the Mennonites. He said
it was because the word Hutterite was sometimes mentioned, and he for
that reason had us buy a book for him, and the minister would, because of
it, be knowledgeable about who was Hutter and who is Menno Simons....
It is not to be believed how curious this man was about our life
together and community ownership. He asked so precisely that it took
effort to answer him everything. I begged him heartily to be as helpful as
if he were doing this for himself personally, and God would, without
doubt, reward him.

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 13
We went again to Klaus and he was home. After he had greeted us he
said our papers are all ready and are approved for presentation. He read
them to us (with which we were already acquainted, for in previous days

we had taken them to our quarters for approval and read them and found
they were acceptable.
He then gave us instructions about our appearing before the Czar's
minister. He further said he had spoken to a certain count, who is a
Senator, about our case, and that he was considerate, but it was too bad
that we burden our conscience. The government, in setting up their laws,
should always see that they are strictly enforceable. Klaus said the Czar
was coming the 27th.

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 14
Went to find the Ministerium. After we found it, we asked when one
can be received with a petition. We were told on Wednesday. Nothing more
remained for us but to wait.

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 18
We handed our petition, along with the Articles of Faith, to a
government minister ... at one o'clock in the afternoon. After receiving it,
he examined it somewhat and immediately recognized its contents. He
said the Apostle Paul said to be submissive to the government. We replied
that because of this command, we are as submissive as our conscience
allows. But otherwise, according to our Articles of Faith, we cannot accept
the demands upon us which are being planned.
Then he finally looked into the petition, and said there was much to
read in it, and that it was supported by Holy Scripture. ... He further said
he had already given our Articles of Faith to have three copies made; one
would have to be for the Czar along with the petition; the other one for the
minister; and the third he wanted for himself. He said to come Monday,
and by then he will be further than he is now.

As I left he said that the others (that is, the Huttertal delegation) are
not concerned about this. It was difficult to know what to say. I answered
that they didn't agree with us, but up to now considered themselves as
being like the Mennonites.
He said it already was a great mistake that in our previous papers we
had called ourselves Mennonites, and that this would mean we would be
grouped with the Mennonites in all decisions.
Yet, we will try, and with our papers appeal to the Czar. However, he
said this was a bad, bad situation, wherein there is little hope to
accomplish anything. I said he should only do his very best and God, I
believe, had decided long ago how and where he will lead us. This man
now had less hope than he had before. He must have had a strong conflict
with the government leadership, it seemed to me. This was noticeable
from the way he spoke. He also said he had talked a lot with important
persons. He said they wanted to be saved just as much as we, and what was
sin for us was also sin for them. How then can an empire exist? We know
nothing else - soldiers must be.

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 20
We went to the Ministerium and checked on our petition. They
directed us to a certain official, and as we came to him to check on our
papers, he said they were accepted and the minister had decided they must
be presented to the Czar.
Then we went to the room where the minister accepts petitions and
said to the guard that indeed we had found our petition, but we wanted to
speak a few words with the minister personally. The guard said this was
not possible. We replied that otherwise we can't be satisfied, for we have
an important matter. Then he said we would have to wait for a short time,
and then perhaps we could speak to the minister.
We sat not less than two hours before the minister spotted us through
the door and immediately sent a man to us. He said the minister had sent

him to us to give us information. As he had thoroughly read our petition
and Articles of Faith, it was to be concluded that we cannot allow worldly
offices (or worldly employment) or war service. He could give us no
decision in this request, but would present it to the Czar.
After the Czar had read it, then it would be sent over to the
Commission. No one but the Czar could give an answer to this petition.
The man said the minister had obligated him to speak to us, and to tell us
this in his name.
Then we went to our quarters, and when we arrived, a letter from
home had arrived about which we were happy, especially so because all
was still in peace and unity and also everything was healthy, spiritually
and temporally.
***************

1873 Brothers search for a new place to live
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26
We again went to Klaus, for we had certain information that the Czar
would come on the 27th, and that his kitchen was here already. Because
our papers for the Czar were still with Klaus, I went to him in the evening
and found him home.
After greetings, he said, Now, Hofer, what news does one hear? I
replied, How should such strangers as we are, with very few acquaintances
in such a large city, know much news? Furthermore, we have for the most
part stayed in our quarters. Then he said, Well, the Czar is coming the 27th
of this month. I replied I had already heard that, too, and because of that
we came to get the official papers. We also wanted to request advice and
instruction from him - a knowledgeable man in such matters - so that we
may have the best opportunity.

Then he said if he is to be completely truthful about the matter, he
must tell us that giving the papers to the Czar is a matter of how lucky one
is. I replied that God has helped us so far, so I believe he will continue to
help us in our responsibility and situation, and as it pleases him, will
permit it to be accomplished.
He responded that he knows we will apply all possible effort, and if it
isn't possible, then we will have to hand our petition over to others upon
whom such responsibility falls. There are such persons whose
responsibility it is to take official petitions to the Czar, namely Count
Darrupykocr. One can freely request him to take it. It would be the same,
or maybe even better, he told us, when such a prince presents such papers
to the Czar. Then I replied that for this time there is nothing more to know
and say and that we would await the proper time. ... I then took the papers,
which was a rather substantial package, said farewell and went to our
quarters.

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 29
I went to the city to inquire if the Czar would come soon to the city of
Petersburg, for he had indeed returned from his trip in the empire on
October 27, but had not arrived yet here. Until now he had been in Tsarski
Selo. Because I couldn't determine anything, I went to the train station
where he was expected to arrive, for there is a special train station for him
alone to Tsarski Selo. There, I asked an official if the Czar would come
today.
He asked me why I asked about this. I answered that I would welcome
seeing him, for it appears to me that a large parade is being prepared especially at the train station. To this he replied the Czar was indeed to be
here today at 10 o'clock, but no dispatch had arrived and he probably won't
come today. Tomorrow, the officials have arranged for a maneuver to take
place on the large plaza.

MONDAY, OCTOBER 30
Early morning, we were agreed that we, too, would go to the plaza
where the exercise or maneuver took place, in order to see the Czar in
person so that we would know him, which is necessary in order to hand
over our petition to him personally.
He rode by us, surrounded by all his generals, three times only about
five faden (thirty-five feet) away. Otherwise, they were always in the
middle of the maneuvers. He was easy to know for he always pointed to
his breast with his right hand. Otherwise he was dressed as other royalty
and rode on a white horse. The music and cannon shooting was such that it
appeared as if the ground wanted to cave in.
Dear brothers, you can about imagine what our thought were as we
thought about giving our petition to so exalted person. For there were
thousands upon thousands of person and everyone trembled, so to speak,
before him. The greatest of all dignitaries didn't know how to conduct
themselves before him and how to give him his deserved honor. It cannot
be put words how mankind carries on and what goes on at something like
this. The dignitaries present themselves with much ceremony in the
presence of the Czar - with swords, the weapons beside the stockade, and
the other implements. The soldiers stand at attention, ready to shed blood
at a moment's notice. They appear to be the most furious, plundering
animals. After we had watched this for about three hours we went to our
quarters.

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 31
Early in the morning we went to the train station to inquire if the Czar
had gone to Tsarski Selo yesterday after the maneuver. They said he didn't
- rather, he went on a hunting trip and he would return to Tsarski Selo,
either in the evening at 7 o'clock, or maybe the day after tomorrow. After
we had asked about this all very precisely, we went to our quarters, for
going to Tsarski Selo wouldn't help anyway. Furthermore, it was snowing
quite hard and penetratingly cold.

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER I
We drove to Tsarski Selo and pursued everything possible to inquire
how one could present our petition personally to the Czar, but it seemed to
be impossible. Here the guards followed our every step, and wanted to
know what we wanted. We replied nothing. They said if we didn't want
anything, then we had no reason to be walking around on the Czar's court
and immediately asked us for a pass. We told them we had a pass. They
asked us if it was addressed by a certain Kontora. We said yes and had to
produce it.
The guard said if we had a petition, then we should go with him, and
he would take us to the Czar's adjutant, who is just the man to present it to
the Czar. We were told we could speak personally with this adjutant, but
we admitted we did not have our petition with us, so immediately we had
to leave. We sought quarters for it was nearly evening. Oh, God, what
prayers went forth that tomorrow we might find the most favorable time
for our cause.

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2
We went about our business, committed to God. As soon as we came
into the court, we came under watch, and we had to state our purpose.
Then an official took us to the adjutant who took our petition and
examined it. He gave it back and said we should come again at 12:00.
At 12:00 we again went to him and sat in the entrance outside his
office. There was enough to see. There they all passed through, going
about their business. I can't describe the order of these men. On their
breast or shoulders there are so many honor insignias sewed on that they
don't even resemble people; and besides that, they show such frightful
pride.

At last came the adjutant named Mahan Masann Mileradewitsch, a
frightfully powerful man. He took our petition, examined it, and said, you
are probably German. We confirmed this. He further examined our petition
and said he would present it to the Czar in the evening. Then he left with a
proud air.
We just stood there and didn't know what to do now. His response was
not sufficient for us and we had nothing to indicate to us what to do next.
We then told his attendant that we cannot be satisfied with the adjutant's
response. We wanted a more precise response, so that we would know what
to do.
Because of this, the adjutant came again. We told him we very much
wanted a more precise response. He responded that he could not give a
more precise response; furthermore, he told us that what became of our
petition was not at all in his power. Rather, he told us it would first be
considered, and he couldn't say when that would be, for the time for this
has not yet been determined. Then he went back to his office.
As this still was not enough for us, we again went to the adjutant and
told him that we at least wanted proof that we had presented him with a
petition, which he in turn would give to the Czar. Then he said we should
write down his name, the day and date, and then he told us we can research
the status of our petition at any time.
He said once more he would place the petition on the Czar's table this
evening, but whether the Czar would read it today or tomorrow he didn't
know. He said, My duty is, and for this I was appointed, to give to the
Czar, personally, papers that are addressed to him. Then we said, If you
only would. He said, That I must do; else everything would cease.
Then we said that we would very much like to talk to the Czar
personally on behalf of our fate and destiny. He said this could not be, and
that the Czar still couldn't tell us anything at this time, for nothing has
been concluded - no decision has yet been made. Everything ultimately
waits for a decision by the All-Union Council. That probably will take a
long time, he told us.

We agreed to go home, because we couldn't accomplish anything
anymore.

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 3
At 8 o'clock we left Petersburg.

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 4
At 8 o'clock in the morning we came to Moscow. At 5:30 in the
evening we left.

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8
Arrived safe and sound, with peace and joy, at our home place and
were received with love and harmony by all the brethren with the greatest
of spontaneity. All the brothers and sisters openly, with loud voices,
praised our gracious God according to his unspeakable goodness, who
again had returned us to them safe and sound through the guidance of his
angels.

Here Joseph Hofer's diary concludes, and our narrative continues as
before.
***************

1873 Excerpts from Paul Tschetter's Journal

At the same time brothers were appealing to the Czar, others were
looking around for a new place in some other part of Russia or in another
country where colonists were wanted, and military service was not
compulsory. Russian Turkestan and even the distant province of Amur
were considered as possible refuges, since both territories had just been
acquired by Russia and met the necessary conditions. New Zealand and
North and South America were also discussed, although the colonists'
meager knowledge of these countries limited their possibility.
In this concern, the Hutterites made common cause with the
Mennonite leaders, and the correspondence with the official
representatives of the Russian, British, Canadian, and North American
governments is already in print, thus removing any need to reproduce the
contents of the documents here.
The Canadian government sent a special commissioner, William
Hespeler, to southern Russia to suggest that a delegation travel to North
America to investigate conditions there. In 1873, ten Mennonite and two
Hutterian representatives were sent with exact instructions to request
religious freedom, exemption from military service, suitable land at a
moderate price, assistance - if possible - to pay the expenses of
immigration, permission for a self-contained settlement with local
autonomy, unhindered use of German, and the right to found their own
German schools.
They were the elder of the Alexanderwohl congregation, Jakob
Buller; the representative of the Molotschna colony, Leonhard Sudermann
of Berdyansk; the elder of the Volhynia group, Tobias Unruh; Andreas
Schrag, representative of the Swiss congregations in Volhynia; the
representatives of Bergthal Colony, Minister Heinrich Wiebe, with District
Mayor Jakob Peters, and Cornelius Boer; the elder of the West Prussian
congregation at Heubuden, Wilhelm Ewert; two representatives of the
Kleine Gemeinde, Elder Cornelius Toews and David Klaasen; and finally,
Paul Tschetter and his uncle, Lorenz Tschetter, as representatives of the
Hutterites.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/on board
A Journey to America
April – August 1873

SATURDAY, APRIL 14
I started my journey to America, taking leave of my wife and dear
children with a heavy heart and also taking leave of all my brothers and
sisters. Due to circumstances, my brother Joseph Tschetter and my sisterin-law could not be present, although they had planned to accompany me
as far as Nikopol. Their son had taken sick at Hutterdorf and they wished
to visit him there. There were two brethren visiting at our home at the
time, George Hofer and Joseph Hofer, and of these I also took leave. Love
obliged my dear mother and father to accompany me as far as Nikopol and
so we left with a sad and troubled heart, only God knowing if I should ever
see my loved ones again. I put all my trust in the Lord that he might send
his angels to protect us.
There were also three brethren from Huttertal at our home, Peter
Tschetter, Peter Mändel and Christian Hofer, who accompanied us as far as
Nikopol, for it seemed the will of the Lord to have a number of our
brethren present when we departed....

SATURDAY, APRIL 21
When we arrived at the Hamburg railway station we again found the
same noise and bustle that we had already experienced in Berlin. All of a
sudden we heard someone's voice above all the rest: Klassen, Toews,
Tschetter, come to me. We were surprised to hear our names in a strange

place like Hamburg but were informed that he represented the German
Company and had orders to accommodate us.
We entered a spacious hall in a five-story building, where boys and
girls were dancing. I was almost terrified and shrank back. The man said,
Follow me, I will give you a room where you shall be undisturbed. This
was true. I inquired of him as to who these people were who found so
much pleasure in dancing, upon which he answered that they also expect to
sail for America on April 24. I said, They should rather pray than dance.
Yes, he said, but we cannot always pray; we must enjoy ourselves. That is
the way of the wicked world. We then went to our room and retired for the
night.

SUNDAY, APRIL 22
I remained in my room until noon, read the Word of God and
meditated. In the afternoon we called upon the agent August Bolten and
presented to him our letter of introduction from Toews of Odessa. After he
had read the letter, he said that he would do everything possible to
accommodate us. We purchased second-class return tickets from him, two
hundred dollars each, and he promised to ask the captain on the ship to
give us a good cabin. We thanked him for his kind assistance and returned
to our lodging place. The immigration building on one side faces the water
front and rests upon strong piers.

MONDAY, APRIL 23
During the night, shortly before daybreak, many more emigrants
arrived, mostly German, Mecklenburgers from Prussia, with women and
children, numbering more than five hundred souls. They were emigrating
for various reasons. Here at the immigration building all ate at one table
and at a regular hour. Breakfast was served at seven in the morning and
consisted of a large cup of coffee and white bread. At noon, soup, meat,
and potatoes, and in the evening a cup of coffee. The board was good.

In the afternoon I went out sightseeing in the city and among other
places I drifted into a bookstore, where I purchased a little book on Menno
Simons. I walked through the city and observed the hustle and bustle of
the city, for Hamburg is a great business and commercial center with many
canals and bridges, large warehouses, and an excellent harbor in which
many ships were anchored. The people of Hamburg are mostly Lutherans.
The city has large buildings, five, six, and seven stories in height. Most of
the buildings face a waterfront and rest on piers. In the evening, I returned
to my room and retired for the night.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/in America
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25
In the morning we left our lodging place and drove to the ship which
was harbored in the Elbe about two versts away. Here our passes were
examined and we entered the ship with sighs and prayers to God, trusting
our all in him that he might; guide and protect us on the wide and angry
ocean. We departed; at eight o'clock in the morning in a small ship and
after sailing for two hours we came to a very large ship which we entered
and were assigned to our cabins. There were six beds in the cabin and
since there were only four of us, two friends joined our company and
shared the sleeping room with us. For a dining room and a sitting room
there was a large hall. There was always plenty to eat, such as soup, meat,
fish, cheese, butter, plums, cherries, nuts, apples and many other things,
the name of which I did not know. Meals were served four times daily, one
hundred eating at each board. Words fail me to express the table manners
and courtesy of both waiters and patrons. From the Elbe we sailed the first
day into the North Sea. The sea was calm all day and we slept soundly that
night.

THURSDAY, APRIL 26

The sea was calm until ten o'clock in the morning, there the wind
increased and the ship commenced to sway back and forth. I began to have
a severe headache, but was able to partake of a good dinner. Some people
had to leave the dinner table, and still others did not leave their cabins. Of
our companions, Toews did not eat a morsel all day. I was also able to eat
lunch and supper. As our ship sailed into the English Channel, shortly
before evening, the wind increased so that we were unable to sleep very
much. I began to feel so bad that I had to go on deck to get better air. As I
watched the rolling waves and the ship plowing through huge mountains of
water, my spirit went up to God to whose care we had entrusted ourselves.
The godless were little disturbed by the great storm. They continued
dancing and were merry. After a while I returned to our cabin and retired
for the night.

FRIDAY, APRIL 27
When I awoke Friday morning, it was day, and the ship stood still. I
thanked my heavenly Father for his protection for another day and night. I
went on deck and in the distance could see Havre, France, a beautiful city
with a fine harbor in which many ships were anchored. At Havre, we were
detained for twenty-four hours, and spent the time sightseeing in the city.
During this time our ship was loaded with a supply of coal and water.
Around the city of Havre, several fortresses are located.

SATURDAY, APRIL 28
At eight o'clock in the morning, we steamed out of the harbor of
Havre. Our hearts went up to God, that he might protect us on our voyage
and send his angels to guide us on the wide ocean. After a lapse of two
hours we lost sight of all land and now only the blue heavens and the deep
ocean could be seen. The ship moved along smoothly that day.

SUNDAY, APRIL 29
Awoke all well and thanked my Lord for his Fatherly protection. The
ship sailed on smooth seas until ten o'clock in the morning, when a storm
arose which rocked the ship to and fro so that many of the passengers
began to feel sick. Only those who were used to traveling on the sea and
those who possessed a strong constitution were not affected. I, being
frequently bothered with headaches, was also forced to retire to my room,
although I was able to partake of a light dinner, lunch, and also supper.
Many left the table while others did not even appear at mealtime. I thought
and remarked to some of the people. Yesterday, you were so happy, and
today you look so sad.

MONDAY, MAY 7
In the morning at ten o'clock, the flag was raised and we met a small
ship from New York which escorted our ship back to the city. Oh, how the
people all rejoiced that land was finally to be in sight soon. The pastor
sang a song of thanksgiving with a group of men and women in which I
heartily joined. It gave me great joy to know that there were at least some
on board the ship who thought of praising God for his guidance and
protection during our long voyage.

TUESDAY, MAY 8
Early in the morning, we sighted land toward the north after
wandering on the large and stormy ocean for thirteen days. We all rejoiced
at the sight of land. It was not until eleven o'clock that the magnificent
Silesia stopped and we were all transferred to a smaller steamship and
after steaming past more than one hundred ships in one hour, we landed at
Hoboken. At noon we left the ship, went to the city and found a lodging
place in the Karles Unrein Hotel, where we had dinner. During the
afternoon and evening until twelve o'clock, I wrote letters and then I
retired for the night in God's name.

***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/with the Mennonites
WEDNESDAY, MAY 9
New York is a magnificent and beautiful city with many large ships in
the harbor and is very populous. The railroads run double-deck, supported
by steel pillars. In the evening at eight, o'clock, we departed from
Hoboken by train for Elkhart, Indiana. We passed through a tunnel two
versts in length. Through out the entire night we traveled through a
mountainous region.

THURSDAY, MAY 1O
At eight o'clock in the morning, the locomotive suddenly lost the rest
of the train but returned to pick us up. Throughout the day we again
traveled a country with lofty mountains, some as high as six hundred feet.
The mountains are rocky and are covered with trees. People are found
living at the foot of the mountains, plowing such small patches as they
have cleared. On the mountain sides, there seem to be springs that develop
into small rivulets flowing down the steep grades. The soil is chiefly of a
yellowish color. The country with its many green trees seems not a bad
region; very beautiful, but probably not so suitable for agricultural
purposes.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Search for Land
SATURDAY, MAY 12

At three in the morning, we arrived at Elkhart and remained in the
station until morning. We could sleep little for there was much noise
caused by steam engines. From New York we traveled to Elkhart in fortysix hours.
In the morning, we called at the home of John Funk, a minister of the
Old Mennonite Church. He was not at home, but we were cordially greeted
by members of his family and given breakfast. The Old Mennonites have
beards and shave around the mouth. They speak English rather than
German. After breakfast, we called at the Funk publishing house. I was
given a little book and also purchased a songbook.
In the afternoon, many Mennonites came to Elkhart and a man named
Isaac became acquainted with us and took us to his home. We wished to
attend church services the next day and the church was not far away from
Isaac's home. They do not live in villages like we do. Everyone has his
own piece of land, which is fenced. Isaac's land is seven miles from the
church. We arrived at his home just at sunset and were warmly welcomed.
Isaac has a farm of two hundred acres of which one hundred acres is
woodland. He also has a fine orchard.

SUNDAY, MAY 13
Awoke all well and gave praise to God for it. At nine o'clock, we
drove to church with Isaac, where many people had already assembled.
They gave me a seat among the ministers. It happened incidentally that an
infant had recently died and so the funeral services commenced. Songs
were sung for the opening, the first one in German and then another one in
English. The first sermon was in German on the text 1 Corinthians 1:15
Then followed an English sermon of which I understood nothing. Prayers
were said aloud and the people knelt, although some remained seated.
After this another song was sung, and then the child was carried out and
buried. While the child was being buried, the congregation sang another
song.

The Old Mennonites address each other as brethren and sisters. The
ministers are elected, just as we do, and are finally chosen by lot. The
Lord's Supper is taken twice a year, not at a definite time and not for the
forgiveness of sins, but in memory of the suffering and death of Christ.
They baptize when an applicant calls for baptism. The ministers do not
marry couples if one is a member of the church and the other is not. Some
marry couples if both are non-members and when they are later baptized
they are accepted into the membership of the church and become brethren
and sisters of the same. The ban is enforced as in our church. If the
accused repents and confesses, he is again taken into the church.
We again went to the home of Isaac, and a deacon went with us. I
inquired of him why it was that they preach in the English language;
whether it was against the law to preach in German.
He said, No, the government does not object, neither does the
government care what one preaches. The chief reason is that so few of the
people understand the German language. I asked him why. He told me,
Most of the people come from Holland and England and therefore know no
German.

MONDAY, MAY 14
In the morning after we had risen, Daniel led in prayer and then we
had breakfast. After supper he took us to Isaac, who lived four miles away.
... I inquired about the matter of military service. The ministers said their
young men were exempt but during the last war they had to pay three
hundred dollars for every young man who was drafted. * I asked about
those who were unable to pay, and they said that the churches assisted
those who were unable to pay that amount. During times of peace, these
three hundred dollars need not be paid. In America so far, I have seen very
few soldiers.
I inquired if Mennonites bring suits into the courts and if they are
required to vote. I was told that the Mennonites do not go to court, and the
matter of voting is voluntary. In regard to taxes, I was informed that a

person's property is first assessed and then he pays according to the
amount of property possessed, so much per one hundred dollars. Isaac said
that he owns 145 acres of land and paid forty dollars list year, payable to
the county or district wherein one resides.
In the afternoon, Isaac took us to Elkhart, but Funk was not at home.
As a matter of pastime, I went to see his press. The machinery and the
speed with which it works is a marvel. I have never seen anything like it.
At ten o'clock the same evening, Funk came home.

TUESDAY, MAY 15
In the morning, Funk told us that Suderman of Berdjansk and Buller
of Alexanderwohl had telegraphed that their ship would arrive in New
York on Wednesday and he advised us to wait until they had arrived and
thus work with them together in our appeals to the government.
Funk said he would accompany us since we were unacquainted with
the English language.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 16
In the morning after breakfast, David, one of the Old Mennonites,
took us to the Amish Mennonites, who live six miles away, and left us at
the home of a minister named Mosi, where we had dinner and supper.
After supper, Mosi took us to another minister where we remained for the
night. The Amish Mennonites are more plain in their style of dress as well
as in their homes, in comparison with the Old Mennonites. They are not
permitted to wear loudly-colored clothes or to dye anything in a gay color.
Their clothes must be of one color. They use hooks and eyes instead of
buttons, except on trousers. The men must wear hats instead of caps. Their
trousers are of a blue color and have a tight fit. The slit in the trousers is
on the side instead of in front. They are not permitted to cut their beards
around the mouth. The hair is worn long. Girls and women must cover

their heads with a white hood. In their style of clothes, the Amish
Mennonites agree with our Hutterites.
They have no church buildings but have their church services in the
different homes. The man in whose house the services are held must then
furnish dinner for the entire group. Visiting ministers may not preach in
their services. The Old Mennonites are more hospitable to visitors than the
Amish Mennonites, but they also have their dark sides. The minister at
whose home I stayed had three guns in his house, and everyone in the
house smoked, even the women. What is worse among the Old
Mennonites, is that even the ministers smoke.
The country in this community is very prosperous with fine orchards
and pastures and beautiful fields of grain. The people seem pale and not
very healthy. They have plenty to eat and in my opinion they eat too much,
especially of sweets and fruits.
If they would eat more sour foods, they would look more healthy.
They do most of the work themselves, for I did not see many hired men
and maids.

THURSDAY, MAY 17
In the morning after I had arisen from my bed and as I walked out
into the yard, I heard someone shooting. Who would be shooting so early
in the morning, I thought, and just then a gray-haired old minister emerged
from the woods, gun in hand. I did not know what to think and much less
what to say. What a fine example of a non-resistant Mennonite! We had
breakfast at his house and I purchased from him a Martyr's Songbook for
one dollar. ** After that he accompanied us to Elder David.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Canada
TUESDAY, MAY 22
As we did not know the brethren who had just arrived from Russia,
we proceeded on our journey alone with John Funk.
We boarded the train at Elkhart at four-thirty in the morning and at
eight we arrived in Chicago, which is one-hundred two miles from Elkhart.
The city is located on Lake Michigan, and has a large navigable canal.
This city nearly burned to the ground one and one-half years ago. The
people say that since the creation of the world, there never has been a fire
like that. The loss of the fire was estimated at $200,000,000. Many people
lost their lives.
By this time, large portions of the city have been rebuilt. There are
buildings from seven to eight stories in height. We went through many
long and crowded streets and came into Chicago by a subway, such as they
have in Berlin. This passes under the Chicago River. It was a fathom high
and one and one half fathoms wide with an arched ceiling laid out with
brick, like a cellar.
The inside was cool. The street cars passed through the tunnel while
over it passed boats and steamships. It took us fifteen minutes to walk
through it. One's mind can hardly comprehend what man is able to
construct. According to all these things the end of the world must be nigh.
Because I was very tired and did not feel well, we went to a hotel to
rest. Later in the day, we went to the city to look for the brethren, but could
not find them. We then looked up the railroad station agent and inquired
about the land and then returned to our room.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 23
Because there was no hope of meeting the brethren in the city, we
boarded the train at ten in the morning for St. Paul. This city lies in the

state of Minnesota, four-hundred eight miles from Chicago. We traveled
through all kinds of territory.
At first the land was beautiful and level with plenty of water and
thick woods. Then we came to a hilly region with many bridges over
streams and then more level country. After twenty-one hours, we arrived at
St. Paul.

SUNDAY, MAY 24
At seven o'clock this morning we arrived at St. Paul and went to the
business section of the city. We made our headquarters at a hotel. The
hotelkeeper's name was Wildenjager. In the forenoon we went to the
courthouse to inquire for information. They treated us courteously, asked
for our names, and said that in the afternoon we could meet a man who had
also lived in Russia. He would explain the different lands here in America,
for there are railroad lands, government lands, and school lands.
He said he would see us in our rooms at two o'clock in the afternoon.
At that time, he came to our room and gave us much information in regard
to the land. He took us to the railroad agent, who also has millions of acres
to sell at reasonable prices. We received telegraphic information that
Suderman and Butler were also on their way to St. Paul.
This city was founded sixteen years ago. It is not a very large city, but
has fine buildings and is quite important in trade: and commerce. One can
buy everything that is needed.
In the evening the Bergthaler deputies, Jakob Peters, the village
mayor (Oberschulz), Henry Wiebe, a minister, and Cornelius Boer came to
our room. Oh, how glad we were to see them. It seemed to me that they
were of my own. They had already visited many parts of the country, but
as yet had not found homes. They had been in the South in the state of
Texas and informed us that people in that state were already harvesting
wheat, but they did not like that country. After talking over many matters,
we retired to our rooms for the night.

FRIDAY, MAY 25
Arose well, thanks only to God the Almighty for his Fatherly
protection and guidance. The Bergthaler brethren came to our room. We
asked them to travel with us, but they said that they had already promised
to join the Molotschna brethren, who were to meet them in the city. In the
morning we proceeded to the station, Wiebe helping me to carry my
baggage. On the way we talked about nonresistance and how he liked the
country here. He said the country did not appeal much to him and that
after all, the question of military service is the most important. He thought
that it would not be possible to secure total exemption from military
service in the United States but that the English government would be
more liberal and grant a charter guaranteeing exemption from military
service, which was better than what this country could offer.
He spoke very sensibly, so that I immediately learned to love him. He
said one should not only consider the land question, but also not forget the
matter of freedom, for that is the reason why we came to this country and
are making this long journey.
Then we took leave, boarded the train and left St. Paul. The city lies
on the Mississippi River and a long bridge several fathoms high spans the
river at this point. Our destination was Duluth. At first the country was
quite level but somewhat woody and then came many rocky cliffs.
We crossed five different bridges, so high that one became dizzy
when looking into the deep below. I estimated the height over one hundred
feet and the stream was so swift that it had the force of fifteen thousand
horsepower. The name of the river was St. Louis.
At four-thirty we arrived at Duluth. The city is located on a lake,
which was full of floating ice. The city is only small, having been founded
only four years ago. On one side the city lies on a high hill with many
trees.

The city is one-hundred fifty-six miles north of St. Paul. Due to the
ice, it was quite cold. We remained in the city for the night. There is also a
large immigration house here, built by the railroad company for the
welfare and comfort of the immigrants, as well as for their own interest
and profit.

SATURDAY, MAY 26
At seven in the morning, we again took the train, traveling toward the
southwest because the country here seemed too cold to us and grain was
planted too late in the season. We journeyed through level plains of
woodland with many lakes. Here and there one could see a miserable hut
inhabited by Indians. These Indians are quite civilized and would not hurt
anyone. At eight o'clock in the evening, we arrived at Glyndon, where a
large immigration hall is located, built by the railroad company. We
decided to remain here over Sunday because lodging is free and meals
could be secured at very reasonable rates. The land around Glyndon is very
level. It is probably too wet most of the year and that is a great drawback
in spring plowing. Several people have already settled here. The distance
from Duluth to Glyndon is two-hundred fifty-eight miles and it took us
thirteen hours to travel the distance by train. In the evening there was a
great thunderstorm accompanied by rain and wind.

SUNDAY, MAY 27
In the morning when I awoke all well, thanks to God the Spirit told
me that this was Pentecost. A longing immediately overtook me to be with
my wife and children and celebrate Pentecost with them. I became very
sad and began to think how I could possibly comfort myself in this
wilderness. I took out my Martyr's Songbook and read a few songs. I then
saw what people had been willing to suffer for the name of Christ.
I took new courage and felt better. I reconsecrated myself wholly to
God and to his Fatherly care.

MONDAY, MAY 28
Awoke rested and much refreshed, praise to God. After breakfast we
rode out for a distance of a few miles into the country on a wagon to see
how the farmers were getting along in their work. There were as yet only a
few pioneers settled in this region. Much of the land that had been plowed
was yet under water. The wheat had only a poor stand and was very weedy,
due to late seeding. The grass was only thin and small. The land was very
level and the soil was black, but somewhat sandy. It seemed to me that
were we to settle here, we should never be threatened with famine, and,
provided we were industrious and God-fearing, the Lord would not
withhold his rich blessings. Since the region seemed somewhat cold and
spring came rather late, we decided to go further south to investigate
conditions there.
All Monday we had our lodging place at the immigration house.
In the afternoon, we again journeyed out into the country in another
direction. The land here seemed better than that which we had seen in the
morning because it was richer in grass.
We drove around the fields the entire afternoon and in the evening we
met our brethren, Jakob Buller, Leonhard Suderman, Wilhelm Ewert of
Prussia, Tobias Unruh of Poland, Andreas Schrag of Poland, Bernhardt
Boer, Heinrich Wiebe, and Jakob Peters of Bergthal. We drove on for
another short distance and came to the little town of Fargo, where we
remained for the night.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Grand Forks and Minnesota
TUESDAY, MAY 29

In the morning after we (sixteen of us) had rested, praise to God the
Highest, we prepared at five in the morning to leave Fargo. The Red River
is the boundary line between the state of Minnesota and the territory of
Dakota. The land around Fargo, for a distance of 60 miles in length and 35
miles in width, is extremely level and has few trees. Then it becomes more
hilly and somewhat stony with numerous salt lakes, one of them being
one-half mile across. This lake is spanned by a bridge.
There are also streams here and there with trees along the banks. The
lumber can be used only for fuel. The soil is black with a mixture of sand
farther into the subsoil.
At two o'clock, we arrived at the James River. We were now one
hundred miles from Fargo and we decided to go no farther. Funk said he
knew the land well in this region and there was no use in going any farther,
because the land gets no better than that which we have already seen. The
farther we go, the farther we get from Fargo and from the lumber regions,
so that it would be quite difficult to settle for those reasons.
The railroad continues for just another hundred miles and then ends.
We took the same train back to Fargo at four o'clock in the afternoon
because the land around that town looked better to us. At one o'clock the
same night we arrived at Fargo.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 30
After breakfast, six of us, in two wagons belonging to the railroad
company, together with Funk and two agents, drove out into the country to
investigate the land thoroughly. We drove through many fields. The land is
so extremely level that it would be impossible for water to be drained in a
rainy season. There is much tall grass around the wet spots, but the ground
is not marshy. The grass is only thin, the soil is black with a sandy subsoil
and further down we find a gray loam, but less sandy. One man was
seeding oats.

We spent the entire day roaming through the fields. We had a lunch
under the open sky which the agents provided for us and late in the
afternoon we again returned to our quarters.

FRIDAY, JUNE 1
At eight o'clock in the morning we began our journey on the ship and
at two o'clock in the afternoon we departed from Moorhead, (north along)
the Red River to Manitoba, twelve of us brethren from Russia. The
steamship was five fathoms wide and twenty fathoms long. The Red River
has a width of twenty fathoms. In the evening the ship stopped and soon
the godless life of the people on deck began with music, card-playing, and
dancing....

MONDAY, JUNE 4
At eight o'clock in the morning we arrived at Fort Pembina in North
Dakota. Here I saw soldiers in uniform, also many cannons. They were the
first soldiers I had seen in America, and I had traveled in this country for
more than a month, in different cities, etc. We proceeded a little farther to
the Canadian boundary line, where we all marched out of the ship and then
again back into the ship in single file. We were all, inspected by the
English government officials. Everyone was asked where he was from, his
age, name, and occupation. All was put on record. This was at ten in the
morning.

TUESDAY, JUNE 5
At five in the morning, we stepped from the ship and walked to the
city, which was one-half mile from the river. The name of the city was
Winnipeg. It is only a small town. Along the river there are numerous
fortresses guarded by soldiers, belonging to the English government. The

soldiers wore red uniforms. From Fargo to Winnipeg is 224 miles by land
and somewhat farther by water, but I am not certain how much.
In the afternoon, we were called before the governor. He was very
kind and friendly and spoke much, but all in the English language.
Hespeler was our interpreter. The governor spoke of all the advantages that
they could give us, but of course, one cannot depend on that. In the
afternoon, twenty of us in three wagons drove out into the country to look
at land and talk to the farmers.... The land does not seem bad. The soil is a
black loam with not much sand. The wheat stand was small but looked
fresh and healthy. One could also see considerable unthreshed wheat left
from the previous year.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 6
At nine o'clock in the morning, twenty-five of us again drove out into
the country in five wagons with two extra wagons for tents and provisions
going in advance. As we were about to leave with our wagons, we were all
lined up and a man came carrying a tripod with a box and glass on top. I
was wondering what he wanted and was informed that he would take a
photograph of us, which was not to my taste, because I do not like to have
my picture lying around in all parts of the world.
But what will you do with the world? World is world and will remain
world until the Lord will come and end it all. We then took the ferry boat
and crossed the Red River. After we had journeyed fifteen miles, we
halted, fed our horses, and had dinner while it rained quite hard. In the
afternoon, we continued our journey through many muddy and marshy
places. At one place the horses slipped and fell and we had to draw the
wagons out by hand. The roads were very bad.

FRIDAY, JUNE 8

At ten in the morning, we continued our journey and soon we came to
a house where only the wife was at home and she spoke a beautiful
German. They had been living in Canada for two years and we talked
about many things with her and asked many questions. She praised the
country, very likely because she wanted neighbors.
In America, the people are all alike in that respect, i.e., everyone
praises his own community because he wants it settled. Every merchant
praises his own ware. This region seemed more subject to drought. We
crossed several streams and at noon had our dinner, but the mosquitoes
were so bad that one could hardly defend himself.
In the afternoon, we drove on, crossing still other streams. On one
occasion we led the horses across the stream. A little farther on we
remained for the night, but the mosquitoes were terribly bad.

SATURDAY, JUNE 9
After breakfast we again traveled on for fifteen versts, then had
dinner and from thence proceeded on to the town of Winnipeg.
The land through which we traveled that day was marshy and quite
woody, but I reckoned the lumber could be used only for fuel.
At some places the land is good, but railroad facilities are poor. The
town of Winnipeg is forty-five versts from this land and the roads are very
bad. The lumber for building purposes must be shipped by way of the Red
River from Minnesota.
To most of us, the Manitoba country was not to our liking, but seven
of the brethren liked it and wished to journey another one hundred versts
to the southwest, where there was some more land for sale. The five of us,
Lorenz Tschetter, Ewert, Schrag, Tobias Unruh, and myself and Brother
Funk, decided to return to Dakota and meet the other brethren at Moorhead
within two weeks. We took leave of the brethren and at midnight boarded
our ship.

MONDAY, JUNE 11
At eight o'clock in the morning we stepped from the ship at Fort
Pembina after journeying on the river for one hundred versts. A large
wagon with four mules and one wagon with one horse were given to us to
go out and see the land. At noon we started out, going westward into
Dakota. On one side of the road were thick woods of oak and lime trees
with the Pembina River winding its way through the woods.
A short distance (three to five versts) to the north is the Canadian
boundary line. We drove on for twenty-seven versts and found very
beautiful land with black soil and an excellent growth of grass. Some
grasshoppers could be seen, but not as many as in Manitoba.
We remained for the night at the home of a man who was part Indian.
He himself was not at home. His wife and servants treated us very nicely.
He had a beautiful house, the floors covered with rugs. He had about 40
head of horned cattle. The housewife gave us a good supper, for they are
wealthy people. After supper, we took a walk into the woods, where we
found many beautiful trees such as oaks, poplars, and limes, often so thick
that two men could hardly reach around them. We came to a stream that
flowed swiftly enough to drive a fair-sized mill. Then we again returned to
our lodging place, where we sang a few songs, held a short prayer service
and retired for the night.

TUESDAY, JUNE 12
We slept very well and had a good night's rest, praise to God. The
lady gave us breakfast, for which we paid a little, but not much.
We drove eight versts farther in the country. Here the land was quite
sandy and the grass was thin. After going another twenty versts, we came
to a German farmer who was very friendly to us. Here we fed our mules.

He told us many interesting things about the land. Barley is seeded
about April 24 and cut about June 28. Wheat is seeded about April 20 and
cut July 20.
In the afternoon, we again climbed two steep mountains. Here was a
level plain forty-five versts long and five versts wide After driving about
nine versts around this plain we again returned and had supper at
Emerling's place. We sang a few songs and Brother Schrag led in prayer.
After that we retired for the night.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 13
In the morning, Brother Ewert led us in prayer and then we had
breakfast. After breakfast, we decided to look at land on the other side of
the river, but since it had rained considerably during the night, Emerling
said it would be impossible to cross with our large wagon and four mules,
but he thought it might be possible to cross with one horse and small
wagon. Only one of us could go along with the guide, since the wagon was
so small. I was selected to go along and see the land and report in the
evening.
We crossed the Pembina and two other small streams. After driving
for nine versts, we came upon a level plain between the Pembina and
Tongue rivers, a stretch of land eighteen versts wide. The land is at first
level and the soil black, but there is a great difference in soil at different
places, here sandy and again heavier.
The land seems a most excellent country for cattle raising with plenty
of water and grass. The man with whom I drove could not speak German
and I could not speak English but we managed to understand each other by
means of signs. I spoke to him in Low German (Platt Deutsch) which he
could understand quite well, for there is a great similarity between Platt
Deutsch and English.
We then returned home, crossing the Tongue River, which flows into
the Pembina three versts away from the Red River.

At six in the evening we came to the town of Pembina. I was very
hungry and went to a German man named Abels, who was a butcher in the
town, and he gave me something to eat.
A little later the other brethren also came and Abels also gave them
something to eat. We remained in Pembina for the night.

THURSDAY, JUNE 14
At four o'clock in the morning, we boarded the ship for Fargo to look
at some land in that neighborhood. The land from Pembina to Fargo is
woody on the eastern or Minnesota side of the river, but the western or the
Dakota side has no trees and the land would make an excellent cattle
raising country. I composed a song today while sailing on the river, to the
melody,
Barmherziger getreuer Gott.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Nebraska
FRIDAY JUNE 15
At three o'clock this afternoon, Brother Funk and I left the ship at a
town called Grand Forks and traveled with the mail coach instead, because
we could get a better view of the land.
At this point, the great Red River branches off to the Minnesota side.
Many logs are seen floating to Manitoba. From Pembina to Grand Forks is
a distance of one-hundred twenty versts and from Grand Forks to
Moorhead is one-hundred fifteen versts. At Grand Forks, there is a saw
mill and a large store where almost everything can be purchased. Since we

could get no horses here, we remained in Grand Forks for the night. We
were invited to supper by a man named Andreas.
After supper, I walked out into the country and found very fine level
land, black soil, and a good growth of grass.
Since it got to be quite late, I again returned to the town and remained
at the post office for the night. I composed a song today, The New
Jerusalem.

SATURDAY, JUNE 16
We continued our journey with a two-horse mailcoach, crossing a
good farming country along the Red River. The soil is black and grass is
plentiful.
The land along the Minnesota side has many more trees than that on
the Dakota side. After going for thirty-three versts we changed coaches,
now taking a four-horse coach and a different driver. We drove on for
eighteen versts.
Here the land was lower and there was excellent hay land. The water
in the streams was clear and the land was settled with here and there a
home.
We then changed to another four-horse coach and went on another
twenty-one versts and changed again for the next twenty-one versts. Here
we found many roses blooming.
For the last twenty-two versts we again changed coaches, and at ten in
the evening we arrived at the town of Moorhead. I walked across the Red
River bridge to Fargo, a distance of one verst, to my old lodging place and
found a letter waiting for me from my wife, and was very glad to hear
from my loved ones at home. The other brethren, who had come by ship,
had not yet arrived, and so I remained here for the night....

MONDAY, JUNE 18
At six o'clock in the morning, we left Fargo for the west. After we
had gone about twenty miles the train stopped. We stepped off and
proceeded by wagon to our tents that bad been pitched not far away. The
land here is somewhat low. We took two teams and drove to the northwest,
where we found numerous streams and fine level land with grass quite
plentiful. At noon we returned and had dinner in our tents....
I walked six versts to the south from the railroad and crossed
numerous streams. The land seemed dry, although grass was quite
plentiful. I returned home after dark and met the other brethren, who had
just returned from their drive. We had supper in the tent. Tobias led us in a
brief prayer service and then we retired for the night in our tents.

TUESDAY, JUNE I9
We sang a song of praise and I led the group in a short prayer service,
after which we had breakfast in our tents. We again drove toward the north
and east to look at some lands. Here the land was woody at some places.
There were numerous streams and grass was plentiful. The land is more
rolling, but the low places are not marshy. Some sections are quite stony.
In the evening we returned and had supper. Brother Ewert led in prayer
and, after singing a song, we retired for the night in our tents.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 20
After morning services and breakfast, we drove ten versts to the
northwest as far as Rush River. We found tall grass. We had dinner on a
spot near two trees standing close together with another lone tree standing
not far away. Then we crossed the Maple River and the railroad tracks and

drove to the southward. For four versts along the Maple River the land had
plenty of moisture, but the last one hundred versts the soil was dry.

THURSDAY, JUNE 21
After breakfast and morning service, we packed our tents and drove
seven versts south through a low and grassy valley, then seven versts west
and again ten versts south, across the Maple River, which here has steep
banks. At places, one could see trees. Then we drove ten more versts
southwest. Here the land was higher and grassy, trees quite plentiful and
many flowers, especially along the river banks. Upon returning to our tents
in the evening, we had supper and Brother Schrag led us in prayer. When
we retired, a great rainstorm came with thunder and lightning, but we
remained dry for our tents were well made.

FRIDAY, JUNE 22
After morning services, conducted by Brother Ewert, and breakfast,
we drove twelve versts westward. The land was somewhat higher and quite
stony.
Here we crossed the railroad and we saw a large machine operated by
steam, with a long arm and shovel at one end. This arm raised, bringing up
the shovel with a half-load of dirt and in this manner loaded a railroad car
with dirt in a few minutes. We crossed the railroad track and proceeded
northward for about ten versts. The land here was still higher and also
stony. Then we again returned to the same spot where we had crossed at
noon, drove west two versts, left our teams at that place and boarded a
train for Fargo, which was thirty-seven versts.
Upon our arrival there, Lorenz, Tobias Unruh, and I walked across the
bridge to Moorhead where our baggage was stored at the home of a
German man. We remained there for the night.

MONDAY, JUNE 25
After prayer service and breakfast, the brethren Buller and
Sudermann went out west to see the land along the railroad that we had
gone over several days before.
Lorenz and Tobias drove out to a farmer near Fargo. They found good
land and an excellent stand of grain. The wheat that had been seeded April
19 and the barley that had been seeded May 5 were now heading on June
25.
They brought samples of the grain along to town. This grain was the
second crop on that land, it having been broken the year before.

TUESDAY, JUNE 26
I remained in my room in the forenoon. In the afternoon, a man came
over to our room with Dakota and Minnesota maps and showed us where
we could have access to good pine lumber. He was an official representing
the forest department and advised us to buy woodland at $1.25 per acre,
eighty to one hundred miles from Fargo.
The wood could be floated to Fargo on the Red River. The man was
not able to speak German, so he went to get a German interpreter.
He gave us Dakota and Minnesota maps. This German man invited us
to his home and we accepted the offer. He lived with his father, mother,
and two grown sisters. They were very friendly and told us many things.
They had already lived at many different places, but liked it best here
in Fargo. They gave us some good beer to drink. Their house had only very
thin walls, and I asked the man if it was not too cold in winter. He said it
was not.

We again went to our rooms and in the evening the English man
called on us again, bringing a letter I was to carry and deliver to the
governor of Minnesota, at St. Paul. He also gave us a jar filled with sod.
Later in the evening the other brethren who had gone out west to see the
land returned and told us what they had seen. They liked the land very
much.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 27
We left Moorhead at ten in the morning with a fourhorse mailcoach,
seven of us brethren of the delegation and Funk. Because it was quite
crowded, I sat with the driver, which suited me very much, for I could
thereby get a much better view of the land. The land for the first eighteen
versts was higher, with black soil and a fine stand of grass. We went
another thirty-three versts and reached McCauleyville. Here the horses
were again changed and after driving thirty-three versts farther, horses
were again changed. We continued fifteen versts more and arrived at
Prickeritz at eight in the evening.
We drove fifteen versts more and came to Breckenridge, where Seper
of St. Paul and the railroad agent waited for us. We remained in
Breckenridge for the night.

THURSDAY, JUNE 28
We left Breckenridge at seven in the morning by train, with Seper and
the railroad agent. At ten, we arrived at Douglas, which is sixty versts
from Breckenridge. Here teams were already waiting for us to take us out
to the land. For the first fifteen versts from Breckenridge, the land was a
low plain, then the next thirty versts somewhat higher and the last fifteen
versts somewhat more hilly with small lakes on both sides of the railroad
line.

In the distance, one mile away, one could see some forests. At eleven
in the morning, we went out in two wagons to look at the land.
We drove for twelve versts and then returned. We found many small
lakes, a number of them every mile so that about one-third of the country
is under water. Near these lakes, the grass is very tall and the land near the
lake shores is quite stony. The soil is black with a mixture of shiny sand
slightly beneath the surface. Still further down there is a yellowish loam.
The grass is not so thick, although the wheat along the roadside
looked good and was just heading. The height of the wheat came up as far
as my arms. The corn also looked nice and green. The region as a whole
did not appeal to me, especially for village life as we have it in Russia,
because there is too much water and bottomland.
In the afternoon, they took another drive to the other side of the
railroad line, but I did not go along because it was too crowded. The
brethren came back in the evening and reported that they liked this land
much better than that we had seen in the forenoon, but it was already
settled considerably. We remained for the night at the railroad station.

FRIDAY, JUNE 29
At ten in the morning, we took the train from Douglas to St. Paul and
arrived at Willmar at two in the afternoon, the distance being 108 versts,
just half the distance to St. Paul. The land is hilly and has many small
lakes. It is quite well settled.
I saw many fields of wheat, oats, and barley. The stand was good and
the grain was just heading. From here we went to Litchfield, a small town
forty-eight versts from Willmar. At Darwin, 108 versts from St. Paul, the
land becomes wooded.

SATURDAY, JUNE 30

When we arrived at our rooms, we found a man waiting for us who
wished to show us the sights of the city. We went along with him and he
showed us the whole town. After dinner, at two o'clock, we boarded the
train for St. Paul, where we were to see the governor and get information
from him in regard to the lands and the matter of exemption from military
service.
But he could speak only English and no German and so Brother Funk
acted as our interpreter. He promised us the best of everything in his
power, but in regard to the matter of exemption from military service, he
did not say much because it was not within his power. Then we returned to
our rooms for the night.

MONDAY, JULY 2
I felt somewhat sick this morning because I drank too much ice water
in the great heat. At 8:00 in the morning we went to the railway station. A
special car had been attached to the train. The car had sleeping
accommodations, a very convenient thing, because I felt sick. The old man
Seper was with us, as well as a young man by the name of Rosen, who was
a Mennonite. His father is a minister in Hamburg. A railroad agent was
also with us. At two in the afternoon we arrived at St. James, where we had
dinner. Then we came to the little town of Worthington, which is 250
versts southwest of St. Paul. The land covering these 200 versts is mostly
rolling prairie land with black soil.
We arrived at the little town of Worthington shortly before evening.
Here we stepped off in order to see the land. Sixteen of us went out in four
wagons, driving six versts, and then returned to our rooms. The land was
hilly with quite a good stand of grass. The grain along the roadsides was
small.

TUESDAY, JULY 3

In the morning, we proceeded by special train thirty versts eastward
to Heron Lake and from there we went out in four wagons, fifteen of us, to
see the land. We drove until noon and then stopped for dinner at the home
of a farmer who lives in a grove of trees.
The growth of grass was quite plentiful, but the grail along the
roadside was quite small, thin and of a yellowish color
In the afternoon we drove another thirty versts, following a different
route. Then we returned to Heron Lake and took our train back to
Worthington, where we remained for the night.

WEDNESDAY, JULY 4
I did not feel well when I arose this morning. We again took the train
to Worthington and went out by wagon twenty versts to see the land.
Here the wheat was also small, thin, and suffered from drought. The
grass was quite plentiful. The soil is sandy and mixed with saltpeter. The
water is likewise mixed with saltpeter.
Later in the afternoon, a hot wind came up, the same as we sometimes
have at home. The land is hilly and has deep valleys here and there. We
drove as far as the town of Windom, which is forty-five miles from
Worthington. Here we had dinner. Then we went to Sioux City, which is
located in the state of Iowa, 150 versts from Worthington. The Minnesota
line is twenty versts from Worthington. We had supper in the town of
LeMars. At ten in the evening we arrived at Sioux City and were met by
another railroad agent.
The old agent who had been with us for the last few days then took
leave of us. Rosen also took leave of us and we remained for the night in
Sioux City.
***************

1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/meet with President
THURSDAY, JULY 5
The town of Sioux City is located on the Missouri River near the
boundary line between Iowa and Nebraska. We left Sioux City at seven in
the morning and arrived at Council Bluffs, a small town. Here we changed
trains, crossed the Missouri River over a large bridge one verst in length,
and came to Omaha, Nebraska. Omaha is 150 versts from Sioux City. Then
we went as far west as Columbus, another small town, 138 versts from
Omaha. Here we stopped and became acquainted with some colonists, who
had recently emigrated from Odessa, one of them by the name of
Hildebrand. Most of these people had purchased farms, while one of them
had entered the mercantile business. We talked over many things with
them. The women were especially anxious to tell of their trip from Odessa
to America.
They were all well pleased with their new location. We remained at
the home of Hildebrand for the night.

FRIDAY, JULY 6
After our usual morning services, we drove twelve versts to the north
of Columbus in four wagons, fourteen of us. The country is excellently
suited for wheat, oats, and corn. The grass was not particularly plentiful.
The land is rolling and streams are scarce. Water is found 113 feet in the
ground. Wells are made by boring, so that a narrow pail can be used for
drawing water from the well. The soil is mixed with a grayish sand and
loam. There are no forests here and the lumber for building purposes must
be shipped from Minnesota.
After we had viewed the land, we again returned to Columbus, where
we boarded the train at four in the afternoon for Ayr Junction, 104 miles
from Columbus. After we had left Columbus, I found I had forgotten my

little box, which contained some valuable papers, at the place where we
had stayed overnight. What I was most concerned about was the fact that
among the papers was also my pass. I informed the agent about it and he
wired back. When we arrived at Ayr Junction the reply was already there.
The agent said that by Monday I would have my box. Two other agents
joined us here while the two former ones who had accompanied us so far
left us. We remained here for the night.

SATURDAY, JULY 7
We traveled by rail as far as Lamel, a small town fifteen versts from
Ayr Junction. Here we had breakfast and then went out in four wagons,
sixteen of us in number, to view the land. We drove as far as a little stream
known as the Little Blue River thirty versts from Lamel. Here we ate
dinner and went on an other twenty versts as far as the Red Cloud River,
where we remained for the night at the home of a man.
During the entire stretch of fifty versts we struck only three farm
homes. The land is quite sandy and grass does not seem plentiful, hardly
enough for pasture. At places one finds ruins of old mounds and ditches.
Water can be found only deep in the ground and in the entire distance we
found only one small insignificant stream. The region is entirely treeless
and far away from all hustle and bustle.

SUNDAY, JULY 8
We spent Sunday in the state of Nebraska, five miles from the Kansas
boundary near the Red Cloud River. We spent the day in our rooms and
attended services in a church in the evening. The sermon was preached in
English by a minister who traveled with us, and we sang a song in the
German language.

MONDAY, JULY 9
At three in the morning, we traveled back fifty versts and at three in
the afternoon we arrived at the little town of Hastings. Then we went to
Sutton, Fairmont, and Crete. In this last-named town I received my little
box of papers which I had forgotten at Columbus the week before. Here we
had supper. At midnight we arrived in Lincoln, the capital of Nebraska.
From Hastings to Lincoln, the distance is 186 miles and we remained in
Lincoln for the night.

TUESDAY, JULY 10
In the morning, eleven of us took a car to get a view of the city. The
car came to our door and took us all along. My, how tired I am of all this
travel and sightseeing by this time, but I could not refuse and so I went
along. When the rest wished to go another one and one-half miles to bathe
in a salt spring, I refused and retired to my room.
We left Lincoln at eleven in the morning, and arrived at Plattsmouth
at three, fifty-five miles from Lincoln. Here we boarded a steamboat and
crossed the Missouri River, two miles wide to the Iowa side and traveled
by train fourteen versts farther on, where we took leave of the other
brethren, Lorenz Tschetter, Tobias, and myself going directly to Elkhart,
while the other brethren went to Summerfield, Illinois.
Brother Funk went to the state of Missouri to visit one of his brothers.
We were all to meet at Elkhart on Sunday evening. We traveled
throughout the night.

WEDNESDAY, JULY 11
Early in the morning, we came through Galesburg, where we had
breakfast, and then to Aurora, a large city, and at three o'clock in the

afternoon we arrived in Chicago. We were met there by a German man
named Resla, who had orders to meet us from the railroad agents in
Nebraska.
He took us to a German hotel. From Plattsmouth to Chicago is a
distance of four-hundred fifty miles.
At five in the afternoon we boarded the train and arrived at ten that
evening in Elkhart, Indiana, one hundred and one miles from Chicago.
We went to Brother Funk's home, where I expected a letter from
home, but was disappointed....
***************

1873 Petition presented to the President of the US
SUNDAY, JULY 15
Felt somewhat sick when I arose in the morning. At ten we went to
the church services where many people had assembled. I gave the opening
sermon and Tobias Unruh gave the main sermon. After the services, Isaac
took us to Leatherman, one mile away, where we had dinner with some
other brethren who were also ministers. In the afternoon, we accompanied
Isaac to another church six miles away where a service was to begin at
four.
There we also met Lorenz and Schrag. They informed us that Ewert,
Buller, and Warkentin's son had gone to Texas and that Sudermann was in
Elkhart. Tobias Unruh led in the opening sermon, and I gave the main
sermon. My text was Col 2:1, I would that ye know what great conflict I
have for you. The congregation was rather small, but when the sermon was
over there were even less. Hardly any were left except the ministers. Very
likely the sermon was not to their taste.

In the afternoon, we had to talk over some matters in regard to
conferring with the government. Some of the brethren first wished to go to
Canada before conferring with the government officials, while others had
gone to Texas.
So we decided that Lorenz, Tobias Unruh, and myself should make
the journey alone, confer with the government officials and continue our
journey homeward. We took leave of all the brethren and I led in a
farewell prayer. They accompanied us as far as the railway station and we
proceeded on our journey to Philadelphia.

TUESDAY, JULY 17
This morning we were still traveling on the train, passing through
many cities. At eleven in the morning we were in Cleveland, Ohio, near
Lake Erie, a large city with many hundreds of factories of various kinds.
We were obliged to remain in Cleveland until four in the afternoon. At that
time we departed from the city, arriving at seven that evening in the city of
Akron and at twelve in Pittsburgh, where we changed. We stepped from
the train and did not know where to find our train. Happily, we found a
German man who assisted us. We traveled throughout the entire night
towards Philadelphia.

WEDNESDAY, JULY 18
At ten we arrived at Harrisburg, at eleven at Lancaster, and at one
o'clock in the city of Philadelphia, one of the most beautiful cities in
America. The distance from Elkhart to Philadelphia is eight hundred
miles. Here we had the address of a certain J. Cooke, who is one of the
richest men in America.
We went to the office of J. Cooke, which was four miles from the
station. We were asked whether we had seen Hiller, a German man who
was to meet us at the station. We said, No.

We were given a lodging place which was paid for by the J. Cooke
Co. man.
Hiller then came in and informed us that Klassen and Cornelius with
the three other Bergthal brethren had gone to New York City and expected
to board the ship tomorrow. We asked Hiller to wire them and ask them to
wait so that we might make the journey home together. We also inquired
about the price of land and they informed us $3.50 per acre. We said three
dollars is enough, and they advised us to wait until tomorrow, when we
could talk with the head official.
We decided to wait until the next day. We then went with Hiller to see
the city waterworks, which is one of the wonders of the world. The water
from the river is forced one hundred feet into an elevated reservoir and
then distributed through pipes all over the city.

THURSDAY, JULY 19
This morning I wrote a petition (Bittschrift) to the President of the
United States. At eight o'clock Hiller came to our rooms. I showed him the
petition and he said that it was very satisfactory and that he would assist
us in handing it to the president personally.
At ten in the morning, we went to the railway offices, where we were
introduced to J. Cooke. He could not speak German and Hiller was our
interpreter. Cooke said he expected to leave the city for a time on business,
but there was a man in New York City, who was the highest official over
the land affairs, and he would be able to inform us regarding the price of
the land.
Mr. Cooke treated us with some very excellent wine which we had to
drink with him. When he found that we wished to see the president, he
gave us a letter of introduction, which may be of great assistance to us.
We were then called into another room where a group of Moravians
wished to meet us and speak to us in regard to our belief and creed. We

explained to them the chief principles of our Confession of Faith and they
wrote them all down until we came to the point as to whether women
could be teachers. I said, No, and they inquired, Why not? I replied,
Because the apostle said, 'I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in silence.' They said, We like all your
principles, excepting this one. We are all in Christ, men and women. And I
said, we are all equal, men and women, in the eyes of the Lord, but the
husband is the head of the wife and so we rather take the head than the
feet.
After I had said that, the discussion stopped and they took leave of us
and went their way. We also retired to our rooms. At seven in the morning,
we boarded the train for New York City, one hundred miles from
Philadelphia, and arrived there at ten in the evening. We crossed a small
body of water and then Hiller engaged a car to take us to his home six
miles out of the city, where we remained for the night.

FRIDAY, JULY 20
At ten in the morning, we boarded a steamship for New York City. We
were busy the entire day dealing with the land company. They did not wish
to agree to certain points and asked us to come again the next morning at
eleven o'clock, when they would be ready with their decision. We returned
to our rooms at the home of Hiller.

SATURDAY, JULY 2 1
Again went to New York City, and at eleven met the land agents. They
agreed to all our points, but wished us to come Monday. Because we
expected to have an interview with the president that day, our meeting with
the agents was postponed until Tuesday.
We intended to wire home and inquire as to what was best to do in
regard to this land business, but upon being in formed that the cablegram

would cost $25, we thought it was too much and so returned to our rooms.

SUNDAY, JULY 22
At ten we went to New York City and attended church services at a
mission, where a sermon was preached in German. The minister spoke of
the cross and tribulations and faith and that we should leave all for his
sake. But when I looked the congregation over, it did not seem as though
they were learning very much. There was altogether too much of this
worldliness. After the service we again returned to Hiller's home and had
dinner there. We remained there in the afternoon.

MONDAY, JULY 23
At ten, we went to New York City to see the railway agent, but he was
sick and so we could do very little. In the evening we intended to go to
Washington. Since this traveling back and forth was expensive, we decided
that Lorenz should stay at our room, while Tobias and myself would go to
Washington with Hiller. Hiller telegraphed to the president at Washington,
but received the reply that we should meet him at Long Beach. We then
planned to return to our lodging place, but since there was no ship there at
that hour, I said I would go to the mission and inquire whether we had
received any mail. On my return I lost my way and wandered around a
considerable time. When I finally found the place, neither Tobias nor
Hiller were there. I waited for an entire hour and still no one appeared and
so I returned to the mission and remained there for the night.

TUESDAY, JULY 24
Received a telegram from Hiller that I should remain at the mission
and that they would meet me there. At ten they arrived and we all went to
the railway agent and he offered us the land for $3 per acre. But we did not

agree on a number of other points and so the deal remained open for
further negotiation some time later.

THURSDAY, JULY 26
This was the day we really intended to leave for home, for our ship
was to sail today. But since we had some important work to do yet, we
decided to remain longer. We had to take new courage and patience and
wait until next Thursday, when another ship would leave for Hamburg.
I wrote another petition to the president, for I did not particularly like
the first one. At eleven in the morning we went to the city. Here I copied
my petition and had it translated into English. Then we again returned
home.
Oh, how I abhor life in the city. All the noise and music make me so
disgusted I can hardly stand it.

FRIDAY, JULY 27
At eight, we took the steamer for New York City, walked through a
part of the city and boarded another ship to Long Beach, where the
president spends the summer and where we were to meet him. We sailed
two hours by ship and traveled one more hour by rail when we arrived at
Long Beach and remained at a hotel. Hiller went to investigate when we
were to appear before the president. He soon returned and informed us we
were to meet him at eight in the evening. Shortly before eight we left our
hotel to appear before the president, which was only one and one-half
miles from our lodging place.
When we arrived at the president's home, we were introduced to
President Grant by Hiller. The president received us in the most friendly
manner and we presented our petition to him personally. After reading it
very carefully the president replied that we must have patience to wait for

an answer to our petition. But since we are to leave New York for home on
August 2, Hiller assured us that he would send us the president's reply.
The petition presented to the President of the United States by Paul
and Lorenz Tschetter follows:
***************

1873 Reply to the Petition
To the President of the United States

We, the delegates, appeal in this petition that in case of war, we
should be free for at least fifty years from everything that concerns war;
after fifty years, we are willing to pay as all others. The other
governmental expenses we are willing to help bear as well as other
citizens. We wish to be as obedient children to the government in all
matters that are not against our conscience. But we cannot partake in
anything that pertains to the military, and pray we may here enjoy in peace
what we are exiled for in Russia.
We also desire to know whether we may be permitted to form our
colony in one community; and have our own German schools; whether we
may control our own schools; whether we may establish our own form of
local government in our colonies as it fits us; and whether we may be
freed from the holding of office and also jury-service and such like; and
also whether we shall be free to vote or not.
We also desire to know under what conditions we may secure
government land, and how many acres each person can have, and how old
a person must be to obtain land; whether we may be freed from taking the
oath, and whether our yea and nay will be regarded as sufficient, for
swearing is just as much a matter of conscience with us as the matter of
war, according to the Word of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ; and

whether, in case our consciences should be violated, we might have the
privilege of emigrating from America.
If we, the delegates, can secure the above-mentioned privileges, our
brethren in Russia will be encouraged to emigrate to America. But if they
cannot secure this, the emigration will be small; for most of them do not
wish to risk the dangers connected with emigration with something
uncertain.
Such is our humble prayer to his Excellency, the President of the
United States, that he may give us a clear answer to this petition so that we
poor and oppressed people may know what to do.
July 26, 1873. Delegates:
Paul Tschetter
Lorenz Tschetter
***************

1874 Journey to America
Several weeks after the Tschetters had reached their homes in Russia,
they received the following reply to their petition to the President.

WASHINGTON, SEPT. 5, 1873
The President sent to me the petition of the Mennonite delegates, and
the reason for the delay in the answer is this: At the time of the meeting of
the Mennonites with the President he was told that they wished to depart
in a few days. The only answer that could be given was that the President
could not guarantee them the assurances they desired.

They wished guarantees of exemption from military service and also
jury service. They desire also to be free from the payment of substitute
money in case of draft; and the right to govern their own schools.
Since personal military service, citizenship obligations, jury service,
and control over schools are all matters that fall under the jurisdiction of
the various states in which they wish to settle, the President says that he
cannot exempt them from the laws of the states and the laws to which
other citizens are subject. As to the paying of substitute money for fifty
years, that, too, is beyond his power of promising. It is true, however, that
for the next fifty years we will not be entangled in another war in which
military service will be necessary. But should it be necessary, there is little
likelihood that Congress would find justification in freeing them from
duties which are asked of other citizens.

It is impossible, therefore, to grant the answer which you (Hiller) and
the delegates wished before their departure. I had to withhold the answer
until I had opportunity to see the President.
With greatest obedience, Your Humble Servant,
Hamilton Fish
***************

1874 In America
When the delegates returned from their journey in late summer that
year, the two Hutterite representatives - as well as the Mennonites from
the Molotschna congregations - recommended settling in the United
States, although assurances from the American government were not as
firm as those from the Canadian authorities.

Meanwhile, it had dawned on the government officials in St.
Petersburg that emigration was about to cost them forty thousand of their
most industrious, capable, and culturally advanced citizens. To prevent
this, Czar Alexander II sent General von Todleben, a German Lutheran, to
Halbstadt, Chortitza, and Alexanderwohl to make a compromise with the
colonists and propose that they give up their emigration plans. He was
well-known to them as the hero of Sevastopol, and had received
instructions from the Czar that in the event of a war they would not have
to do military service, but could do certain types of civilian service
instead. The possibilities offered were service in civilian hospitals, with
the fire company, in imperial forests, in factories belonging to the crown,
or on the railway.
Although the majority of the Mennonites accepted these easier
conditions, the Hutterites and a small but very active Mennonite minority
saw it as the beginning of the end in Russia. Even if the military
supervision was disguised, such civilian service seemed to them to be
directed against their consciences and religious beliefs.
The booklet about the renewal of the church community among the
people led by Michel Waldner comments on this position among the
Hutterites: *
They had lived at Scheromet for several years when the order for
military service was given, and without exception, everybody was to be
called. Those who would not take up arms because of their faith would be
allowed to accept other service, such as assisting in the hospitals, planting
trees, and other areas where they would not need to take up the sword. Our
forefathers had turned such service down, and would rather have moved to
other countries, leaving everything behind, rather than agreeing to serve in
any occupation related to war.
When this decree came out, saying that all who did not want to serve
in military duty should leave Russia within ten years, our forefathers old
and young, packed up, left Russia in the year 1874, and moved to
America...

Preparations were made for the long journey over the ocean to the
United States and Canada. After many difficulties and delays they
obtained passports for every member of their groups. They sold their
farms at great loss. The Alexanderwohl Mennonites, for instance, lost at
least a third of the value of their property because they were allowed to
sell only to other Mennonites.
In spite of these obstacles, a total of more than 18,000 Mennonites
and Hutterites exchanged the Russian steppes for the prairies of North
America (up to 1880, the final year of the ten-year term permitted in
1870).
The Hutterites included the Elder, Michel Waldner, with his
community from Scheromet; the Elder, Darius Walter, with those who had
been living in community at Hutterdorf; and the others from Hutterdorf
who possessed private property but wanted to start living in accordance
with their religion when they reached the new world.
As we have a notebook in which Peter Janzen daily made a short
entry of the practical details, we can follow the whole journey of Michel
Waldner's group from Scheromet. **
First of all the community sold its land to a certain Peter Epp in 1874.
With this land went a windmill, a brickyard, a tile factory, a long, high
stable built of brick and stone and roofed with tiles, a washhouse, a hay
barn, a furnace house, a brickwalled pigsty, and other buildings. The
property was in Schonfelder district, Alexandrovsk county, Yekaterinoslav
Province, about nine miles [15 km] from Hutterdorf.
On Thursday, June 6, 1874, Samuel Kleinsasser, Johann Decker,
Christian Stahl, and Mathias Waldner went to Alexandrovsk to make the
necessary preparations for the arrival of the 109 people who would follow
them from the community at Scheromet. The next day they were joined by
the brothers and sisters with their clothing and other luggage. Their train
left Alexandrovsk on Friday and for five days they traveled with many
changes through Lisowoi, Kharkov, Kursk, Orel (where in common prayer
to the Lord they thanked him for his protection on the journey so far),
Smolensk, Vitebsk, Dbnaburg, and Vilna, until on June 13, they reached

Verschbolovo, a town on the Russian German border. After the usual
formalities with passports and customs, they were allowed to cross over
the frontier. They spent the night in a park near the railway station in
Eydtkuhnen, where they also gathered for prayer. The day after, on June
14, they continued their journey through Konigsberg and Berlin to
Hamburg, reaching their destination on Saturday evening, June 15. They
boarded at an emigrants' hostel, where they had three meals daily and held
their meeting on Sunday.
The following day, June 17, Darius Walter and his community caught
up with them.
At last, on Wednesday, June 19, they were put on a small steamer and,
after two hours' sailing, brought to their ship, the Harmonia, which sailed
the same day. It was to be their swaying, rocking home for the next sixteen
days. After touching at Le Havre, France, on June 21, they set out across
the Atlantic Ocean. Here the motion of the waves and a two-day storm
made most of them acutely seasick. On Friday, July 5, full of confidence
and trust in God, they stood for the first time on American soil in New
York.
***************

1874 Settling in Bon Homme
After they had gone through customs, a smaller ship took them to
Castle Garden, where they bought their railway tickets. The next day, July
6, another little ship took them to the railway station. Shortly before
sunset, they began their journey to the Midwest, via Detroit and Chicago
to Lincoln, Nebraska, and arrived there on Monday, July 10.
The new immigrants went to Lincoln, Nebraska, because land-agents
had influenced them in their choice of a place to settle. After their arrival
they did not find the soil of the kind they had expected. Therefore, they
sent six brothers, three from Michel Waldner's group and three from
Darius Walter's group, to look for land in other parts of Nebraska.

Wherever the brothers saw a place which at first sight seemed to offer
possibilities for settlement, they used their agricultural experience to look
it over with a critical eye. In the meantime, those left waiting in Lincoln
were thankful to enjoy the heartwarming hospitality and ready help of the
townspeople. They were given a wooden building in the town and all
efforts were made to cover the earth-floored basement with boards as
quickly as possible. The six brothers returned on July 31, but as they had
not found anything suitable, they were sent to Dakota on August 1 to
continue their search for land. The other brothers hired themselves out as
day laborers in Lincoln.
In their very first days in Lincoln an epidemic of dysentery broke out
among the children. No less than thirty-six of them were taken from us.
This made the brothers and sisters decide to move for the time being to
Yankton (today in South Dakota). An older brother, Darius Stahl, also died
in Lincoln; he was seventy-eight years old and had been born in Vishenka
on May 17, 1796. The group left Lincoln on August 6, reaching Yankton
the day after. On August 8, they rented a good-sized house where they held
evening prayer meetings whenever possible.
***************

1875 Letter from Bon Homme to Wolf Creek
At last the Michel Waldner community found a fertile piece of land
in South Dakota that satisfied them. It was located on the Missouri River
in Bon Homme County about 18 miles west of Yankton. Thus their,
selection of a suitable piece of land was made independently of any land
agent or of the immigration officer for the Dakota territory. They may
have been influenced in their choice by the fact that the gently rolling
prairie, the type of soil, and the climate were all reminiscent of their old
homeland on the steppes of southern Russia. However, the decisive factor
may well have been that they wanted to settle in self-contained colonies.
This was the reason they did not accept any of the so-called state lands
where, on the basis of the Homestead Act, every settler was entitled to 160

acres of free land. Acquiring individual family holdings was against the
Hutterian principle and orders of Christian community, for each owner
would have had to live on his own 160 acres in order to file a claim to the
property at a later date. A second disadvantage was that the divisions of
land, known as sections (640 acres), alternated with government-owned
and railway-owned property, making it possible for disturbing elements people holding religious views by no means compatible with Hutterite
beliefs - to settle in immediate proximity to them. The Mennonites
brought this to clear expression in December 1873:
Although we are desirous of settling in your country as colonists, we
find there is an obstacle. The undeveloped tracts which apparently would
be chosen for our homes are interspersed, with railway- and governmentowned holdings. If we bought land from the railway company, some of the
sections belonging to the government could be taken by people who do not
belong to our colonies and have no sympathy with us.
As the regulations of the Homestead Act made it inappropriate for
acquiring land for a community settlement, the Hutterites bought 2,500
acres of privately-owned land, part of an enormous farm. This piece of
land was bought for cash. The Dakota Herald, a South Dakota newspaper,
reported on August 25, 1874:
The Hon. W. A. Burleigh yesterday sold 2,500 acres of his large farm
near Bon Homme. The purchaser is a Russo German association formed by
some sort of [apostolic] communists. They made a down-payment of
$18,000 in cash and are paying the rest of the total selling price of $25,000
by installments.
Here the Hutterian community led by Michel Waldner established
Bon Homme Colony, where their descendants still dwell in blessed wellbeing.
The Elder Darius Walter and Minister Jörg Hofer and their group
settled on state land at Silver Lake near Bridgewater on August 10, 1874.
Their first winter in America, which they spent in dugouts, was
exceptionally severe, with many blizzards. In early 1875 the community
moved to land they had bought in 1874, where they built a colony at James

River, near Wolf Creek Wolf Creek. (They had also set up a water mill in
1874, just as Colony founded the Bon Homme community did in 1875.) by
Darius Walter.
The other people from Hutterdorf, who had given up community of
goods while still in Russia but had come to the United States with Darius
Walter, settled on state land about six miles from Wolf Creek in 1874.
Each of them started with 160 acres, which they received free. Their
ministers were David Waldner, Wilhelm Tschetter, and Johannes Hofer.
In late autumn of the same year, the first immigrants were followed
by Paul Tschetter and several families and single young men from
Neuhuttertal (Dobritscha). He and his little group wintered in Elkhart,
Indiana, where John Fretz Funk and other kind and helpful Mennonites
made their situation much easier for them. In spring 1875, these new
immigrants moved to South Dakota, where they settled about nine miles
[14 km] northeast of Darius Walter's Colony near Wolf Creek. They
continued living on private holdings.
In 1875, those who had remained at Neuhuttertal also sold their
property and moved to South Dakota. A few settled near Wilhelm
Tschetter and Johannes Hofer; others bought land at James River. All lived
on private holdings.
In January 1875, a letter was sent from the elders at Bon Homme to
the church at Wolf Creek reminding them: How often we said that if with
God's help both of us would be able to sell, we would come together and
build at one place. ... It is the exact opposite ... for we have now settled in
three separate places. This letter is included here so that it can speak to the
readers of today.
***************

1876 Attempt to unite communities

To all who have received the same faith in God as we have, our dear
fellow members in the Lord: May the blessing of heaven, wherein dwells
the whole fullness of the Father, be with you and refresh you like rain at
evening, and make your righteousness grow green and bear fruit to the
praise of the glory of the invisible and only wise God and Father through
Jesus Christ!
Dear brothers, because we all love you from our hearts as partakers
with us in the grace of the Gospel and in the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we cannot neglect to encourage you, to point out and let you know
the mystery of his will, since it was earlier made plain to you and you gave
yourself to the following the Lord's way and observing his laws.
Thus it is God's will for you: for this purpose he gave you his Spirit
and sealed your election, so that guided and led by his one Spirit you
should walk before him in unity of mind and heart, in the likeness of the
Son of God, Jesus Christ, our Lord. He proved by his whole life that he had
community with the Father, and the Father with him, that he lives with the
Father and the Father lives in him. In the same way, you should show that
you have community with him, that he lives in you and you in him, that
just as the Son does only what he sees the Father do, so you do only what
he moves and empowers you to do. Then you will always be and remain at
one with him. No division and ill will, no distrust or anything related to it
will arise among you, and every way of approach will be shut and barred
against Satan so that he cannot touch or harm you. Dear brothers, consider
the calling and covenant for which you have been chosen and accepted;
think well what has been given and entrusted to you, how precious and
noble a treasure has been bestowed on you so that you have become a
royal priesthood and heirs of God.
Therefore, it is good and necessary for you to keep such a treasure
with great care and diligence, for it is your life, wellbeing, and security. So
we ask you, dear brothers, to see how serious a matter it is before God, and
at the same time the blessing it is for you, to have entered into a covenant
with God, before him and his church, that none of you should have private
property anymore because each gives himself with all that he has, with
body and soul, to God and his church. We are not concerned for money and

possessions, but only for devout and sincere hearts; for the man who
values and reverences God's covenant will always be given more, but the
one who despises it and thinks little of it will easily lose what he had and
come to nothing.
And so, dear brothers, we hope that you, too, realize, and your hearts
give you abundant testimony, that the covenant you once made with God
and his church has not been upheld. Consequently God's order and
direction are not followed, as is, unfortunately, only too obvious. How
often we said that if with God's help both of us would be able to sell, we
would come together and build at one place. We longed to do this and
prayed to our heavenly Father for it. Oh, the merciful Father has granted
our wish. We have sold and so have you. And now we see where we are. It
is the exact opposite of all that we were saying before, for we have now
settled in three separate places.
O Lord, Almighty Father, who will be able to answer for this? We
read in our chronicle that when our dear, God-fearing forefathers were
forcibly separated, they were back together again in a few days. They were
told that not so many could live together in one house, but only a few four, five, six, or more. But they did not want to comply. It pained them
greatly that they were forced to divide into little groups during the
persecution. They took leave of one another with many tears.
And, as was said, we have often wanted to gather in peace, love, and
unity, and our Father in his grace and kindness has said to us: 'Children, I
have granted your wish and have given you a place to settle.' Now it has all
been cast to the four winds.
And so we see, dear brothers, the great darkness covering the Sun of
righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ, in his church. We see the great harm
that has been done among us. Dear brothers and sisters, can we not see
how the Lord's vineyard has been laid waste, and how the enemy of truth
wants to bring it to complete ruin, as can be seen throughout the world?
For our flesh and blood never cease from their furious resistance, so that
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is never born in us and Christmas cannot be
celebrated among us. Instead, the enemy of truth rages horribly against it.
When one asks about the newborn king, Herod is shaken, and all Jerusalem

with him. Dear brothers and sisters, how we should rejoice in the newborn
king, rejoice that he is born! Yet in his church community people are
fearful and would rather live alone and not have community with him! Oh,
let us do away with this deceiving power of our flesh and spirit; let us
silence and suppress our nature (the mother of folly) so that these do not
rise up and take us captive. Oh, you foolish Galatians ! You began in the
Spirit and you want to finish in the flesh.
How delightful the tree is to our eyes, how lovely and desirable
because it gives knowledge! That is to say, it gives knowledge of what is
visible, of what decays and must perish, and makes us value a moment
more than eternity; it is a delight to the flesh, but for the soul it means
eternal, terrible death and destruction. Therefore, we enter the sanctuary,
for we see the end that awaits those who eat the forbidden fruit. To live
according to the flesh means eternal death. But if a man compels himself
to break free, to crucify the flesh, he lays hold of the kingdom of heaven.
So speaks the voice of truth, Christ Jesus. We should look to him.
He offers us the Cross - not like the devil: the old serpent in the tree
makes us eat with delight and pleasure, and after we have eaten, we
become accursed and are driven out from the joy of Paradise; we are
driven from God's church and are robbed forever of the heavenly life in
the kingdom of God. That is what the devil wishes: to make men cast
themselves from the pinnacle of the temple, from the highest command of
love and community with Jesus Christ.
Because by God's grace we recognize the great harm done to people's
souls, we elders considered the matter and agreed to seek help from the
general advice of brothers. This was done. Each gave witness that we still
hold to our first dedication.
Then we considered what had gone wrong. The general meeting
desired to know the reason for the division and recognized that the failure
to act on the majority decision and move together as one group is an
offense against the order of God and his church. That is the most
damaging part of it.

Because we have surrendered ourselves, we also acknowledge that
what the church community buys must be put down to the community's
account and not to one person; for the church is the bride and spouse of
Christ. What is bought with the church community's money must remain
in community ownership, for that is in keeping with our calling.
We elders and the whole church meeting are of one mind and
conviction. We considered in the fear of God whether this is the truth, and
all of us, the whole congregation, found that it was. We elders and the
whole church greet you from our hearts many times over in the name of
Christ. We would like to receive a letter from you and hear what you think.
January 9, 1875.
Jakob Hofer
Michel Waldner
Jakob Waldner
Lorenz Stahl
Michel Wurz
Joseph Waldner
***************

1876 Second mission journey to Russia
According to a diary kept by a brother at Wolf Creek, * the two
communities sent brothers back and forth through November and
December to bring the unity they longed for into being.' Three brethren
went to Bon Homme for a visit and came back completely satisfied and
enthusiastic. In January, Michel and Joseph Waldner returned to Russia,
hoping to bring the families back with them who were still there.

However, that did not stop the movement towards uniting the two
communities. In February it was decided to elect an elder in fourteen days.
Monday, February 21, 1876: Twelve brethren were elected to choose a
bishop. The following Saturday: The brethren came from Bon Homme for
the election. The next day, after the church service where Titus 2 was the
text, the election was held and Brother Michel Waldner was chosen. The
ordination was to take place when he returned from Russia.
***************

1885 Letter from Michel Waldner to community at Bon
Homme
* Michel Waldner and Joseph Waldner were sent back to Russia in
1875 to save more people from destruction, and bring them to America. In
June of 1876 they returned to Bon Homme colony. So they had undertaken
this long journey and did not feel sorry about it. They sailed a second time
across the great ocean with a serious longing and heartfelt prayer to God.
Thus they left under the protection and guidance of God. They took
farewell of all their beloved ones and the whole community, unsure if they
would ever see one another again in this miserable time.
Now, as they fortunately came across the great ocean, and thanked
and praised God that he had led and protected and covered them, they had
to travel quite a distance on a train to come to their relatives. They
undertook this journey from Hamburg.
When they came near to the place where they were supposed to leave
the train, Michel Waldner's relatives were not very far away. Michel asked
the conductor to slow down the train, which he had promised him to do.
The conductor did this right away. When Michel noticed that the train had
slowed down enough, he took his package and his clergy coat and went to
the steps of the car and jumped out. Unfortunately, he hit a stone with his
head and fell to the ground. There he was lying for quite awhile,

unconscious. Then his father, who had died a number of years before,
came to him and asked him, 'Michel, why are you lying here? Stand up,
come with me. I will take you home.'
His father took Michel's coat in one hand, and with the other he
grasped Michel's hand. Michel carried his baggage and his father led him
to his relatives' house. When his father had opened the door and let him
into the house, Michel asked his father, 'Where are we now? In Russia or
America?' But his father did not answer; he only laid his son's clergy coat
down and disappeared. When his friends in the next room heard them, they
were shocked and quickly came in. And when they saw Michel, they said,
'My God, man! What happened to you? You look as if you have been
bathed in blood.'
His baggage, which he was carrying, was also covered with blood, but
on his coat they could not find one drop. So they quickly washed him and
put on clean clothing, and let him rest a little, and he was soon up again
and went after the service that he was sent for, to do with the help of God,
which did not happen without a blessing.
For under the protection and leading of God, many of our people
moved to America. To God be the honor and the glory for all this good that
he has shown to his own and had done spiritually and materially. Amen.
The main purpose of this journey was to visit the two ministers,
Jakob Wipf and Peter Hofer, and their congregation, who, as already
explained, had lived in community of goods and then returned to private
ownership. Wanting to rouse them and remind them of their promise to
live in community, the two brothers from Bon Homme encouraged them to
re-establish community of goods in America with wholehearted
dedication.
Most of them had little inner peace as private owners, because they
knew they had not kept the vow and covenant they had made before God.
Inwardly encouraged by the representatives from America, they promised
to help restore what had been destroyed. They acknowledged their
backsliding, confessed that they had done wrong, and united with our
brothers.

The two brothers stayed several months. During this time several
families joined them and later accompanied them to America. As later
became evident, however, many of the newcomers had neither zeal nor a
genuine basis for their faith.
Some of them joined Darius Walter, though most of them went to
Michel Waldner and the Bon Homme brotherhood. They did little good in
the community, and weakened rather than strengthened it. In the end the
greater part of them gave up community of goods and moved out of the
colony, leaving slander, insults, and unfounded accusations behind them as had happened more than once in earlier days in the church, both in
Moravia and in Russia as recorded in this volume.
At this time, the two ministers Michel Stahl and Martin Waldner and
a few others from Huttertal emigrated to America. Michel Stahl joined
Darius Walter's community. Martin Waldner, however, bought a piece of
land close by and kept to private ownership.
In 1877, the two ministers Jakob Wipf and David] Peter Hofer set out
from Johannesruh with a little group of thirteen families and moved to
South Dakota. Most of these families wanted to live in community of
goods again. After selling everything they made the long journey under the
protection of the almighty God and arrived in Yankton on July 7. Some
went to Darius Walter, and others to Michel Waldner, but most of them,
under the leadership of their own two ministers, founded a third Hutterian
Colony in South Dakota: Old Elmspring, near Parkston in Hutchinson
County, with 5,440 acres of land.
While this group was still living in Johannesruh, in private property,
the people of the new beginnings in South Dakota were enthusiastically
taking steps toward complete community of goods, not only between
individuals but between the two colonies, Wolf Creek and Bon Homme.
Eighteen months after they had left Russia, the people had such a longing
for unity that it was discussed by the Wolf Creek congregation at a
meeting held on Sunday, November 20:
After each one was specially asked and each one expressed his desire
and longing out loud, and none was found who was opposed to it, rather, it

was unitedly acknowledged that everything be brought out in the open that
in former times had brought quarrels and discord. [It was decided] to go
back in time and start over since the building of God's house was hindered.
It was decided that hereafter all savings should flow into one treasury so
that in the future, when a need arises in a colony, one need not ask if one
should give or help. It is self-evident that it follows that the expenditures
be made with counsel and with their full agreement.
When Michel Waldner returned from his first trip to Russia, he was
ordained as Elder. An entry in the diary' for August 5, 1876 clarifies this
ordination:
The brother, Michel Waldner, was give the responsibility for the care
of the whole church and the position of Bishop was turned over completely
to him.

Though written in 1885, later than the era covered by this second
volume of our church history, this letter from Michel Waldner while he
was in Pennsylvania is included to illustrate the early and ongoing struggle
for unity on American soil.
Waldner wrote several letters from Pennsylvania in that year, while
the Hutterian Brethren were exploring the possibility of establishing a
community there on land offered to them by the Rappists, a communal
group whose members did not marry. Though several families lived there
for a time, 1884 - 1886, they eventually returned to Bon Homme.
***************

1651-1873 CHURCH ORDINANCES OF THE
HUTTERIAN BRETHREN
The peace of God be with you, Jakob Hofer, servant of the Lord and
brother.

How do you find yourself with God? Do you still have hunger and
thirst to seek the lost sheep? One of our friends has written to us with
these words: Mennonites and evangelical ministers preach to us so
diligently. But from the church community, we do not hear a single word,
as if they were all dead.
O God! Where did you lose your zeal, dear brother? For I know that
in Russia you went on foot from Kutcheva to Huttertal and seldom did it
go without blessing. And this is how it could be yet.
How far is it with the uniting? It seems like nobody wants to do
anything about it. God will have to take it in hand and lead us together.
There is a sister among us who dreamt she had seen three wells. One
belonged to us, the other to the Dariusleut, and the other to the Jakob Wipf
people (Lehrerleut). But when one was scooping water out of one, it ran
together from all three. And I rejoice over all this and feel that a true
uniting will happen with the Dariusleut. May God in heaven give it, to
experience this joy.
And then again, a brother had a dream that the heavenly host was
singing, and it was so beautiful he could not express it. Even when he
woke up, he felt he still heard the melody, and only very few of us were
there, and only a few whom he could remember. But the others he cannot
remember anymore.
Then after another night, he had another dream, about the condemned,
and it was so terrible that nobody can express it. He had seen many of ours
among them. But he cannot remember any. I was so shocked when I heard
this. You could tell by looking at him that he had seen something very
important. He even said that he was sick for quite awhile.
Dear brother, I think very much about you. You could believe me and
think about the great grace of God. The law has been given to us through
Moses. But the gift of grace and truth through Christ, of his fullness, we
have taken grace after grace. Once we will miss this grace, we will have to
cry out eternally. The Lord has chosen us for his people, and not only for
material things, but much more for spiritual reasons, that we should

proclaim his Gospel, and with the net of his Word, fish his chosen ones out
of the sea of this world.
This will be the true increase that we shall bring to the Lord.
Whoever has saved a soul from the destruction of this world will be
rewarded. Like James says, 'Dear brethren, if there is anyone among you
who strays from the truth, and somebody converts him, whoever converts
a sinner from his erring has helped a soul from his death, and shall know
that he covers a multitude of sins.' This is the apostolic foundation, and as
long as there are some coming in, there will also be some going out. Both
happen to encourage devout and godly souls. For when they come, they
rejoice that some more were added to the church, and when some fall
away, it is also an awakening, a reminder to consider it. From this, God
shall protect us, for to the chosen children of God, everything serves to the
best.
Dear brothers, I am not writing you things you do not know. But we
are responsible to blow the horn while it is today. That much, my dear
brother, I wanted to write you from my weak understanding. But the
richness of the Father, from his love and mercy, provide to you his
blessing.
Through Jesus Christ, Amen....
Now I want to close my simple writing. I pray you that you think
about us and write to us again soon. We greet you from our heart with all
the servants. Greet the poor widows especially. Visit them diligently and
comfort them.
Your lowly brother,
MICHEL WALDNER
February 23, 1885.
***************

Manifesto of July 22, 1763
By the grace of God.
We, Catherine II, Empress and sole ruler of all the Russians in
Moscow. Kiev, etc., etc.
Since the vast extent of the countries in our empire are sufficiently
known to us, we noted among other things that no small number of these
territories lie uncultivated and, for their best use, could most conveniently
and advantageously be settled and populated by humankind. Most of these
areas have an inexhaustible wealth of all types of valuable ores and metals
hidden in their depths; and as they are provided with woods, rivers, lakes,
and seas well situated for commerce, they are exceptionally suited to the
development and increase of various factories, manufacturing processes,
and enterprises.
This occasioned the issue of the manifesto to the profit of all our
faithful subjects on December 4 of the past year, 1762. However, our
desire has been conveyed only in brief outline to foreigners who may wish
to settle in our empire; to clarify our statement we have decreed the
following terms which we now establish with all solemnity, commanding
that they be put into effect.

l. We permit all foreigners to enter our empire and settle in whichever
province they please.
2. After arrival, these foreigners can report not only in our city of
residence to the office specifically instituted for foreign colonists, but
also, as each finds convenient, to the governor in any of the border towns
of our empire, or, if there is no governor, to the highest authority in the
place.
3. As some of the foreigners desirous of immigrating into Russia may
lack the means necessary to pay for the journey, these can apply to our
ministers and embassies in other countries, who are to send them to Russia

without delay, providing the fare as well as paying for all other necessaries
for the journey.
As soon as the said foreigners arrive at our city of residence and
report at the Aliens' Supervisory Office or at one of the border cities, they
shall be required to state their precise wishes and intentions: whether they
desire to register as merchants or tradesmen and to become citizens, and,
if so, in which city; or whether they wish to settle as whole colonies and
villages on unoccupied, productive land in order to engage in agriculture
or various useful trades. All these people are to be promptly granted their
wishes and preferences.
5. As soon as any foreigner has arrived in our dominions with the
intention of settling, and for this purpose has applied to the Alien's
Supervisory Office or at any border city of our empire, he has first of all to
declare his exact intentions as stated above in paragraph 4 and then swear
to be a loyal, obedient subject, taking the oath according to the rites of his
own religion.
6. In order that the foreigners who desire to settle in our dominions
may perceive the extent of our gracious concern for their advantage and
profit, it is our will that:
1. We grant the foreign immigrants to our dominions free and
unrestricted practice of their religion according to the rules and customs of
their church; to those who do not settle in cities, but in unpopulated
sections, especially in colonies, we grant the freedom to build churches
and bell towers and to maintain the necessary number of priests and
church officials; the sole exception is the construction of monasteries and
convents. But warning is hereby given that in no circumstances may any
person persuade or entice a Russian national who also holds the Christian
faith to accept or pledge himself to that person's faith and church, this on
pain of the utmost rigor of our laws. An exception is made for all the
nations on our frontiers who belong to the Mohammedan religion. We not
only permit them to be influenced in a right way to the Christian religion
but also to be made our subjects.

2. None of the foreign colonists who immigrate to Russia are to be
forced to pay the smallest sum into our treasury, or to give customary or
extraordinary labor services, or to quarter soldiers or other people; in
short, there is freedom from all dues and taxes with the following
distinction: those who settle in colonies of many families together on
virgin territory shall have thirty years exemption; those who settle in cities
and register as craftsmen or merchants, either in our capital, St.
Petersburg, or in the neighboring cities in Livonia, Estonia, Ingermanland,
Karelia, and Finland, no less than in Moscow, are to be given five years'
exemption. In addition, all who enter Russia for more than a short stay, in
order to settle and live in the country, are to be lodged at no expense for
half a year.
3. A helping hand is extended to all immigrants to Russia who wish to
grow grain, engage in handicrafts or manufacturing, or build factories and
installations. In proportion to the need for the proposed factories and
installations and to their future usefulness, especially such as have not
been built in Russia before, each immigrant will be provided with more
than adequate support and whatever advances he requires.
4. Each shall receive from our treasury, interest free, the advance
necessary for building a house, obtaining the various types of domestic
animals required by his household, likewise everything for agriculture,
and the tools, accessories and material for a trade. The advance is to be
repaid only after a ten-year interval and then over a three-year period in
equal annual installments.
5. Where the immigrants settle in complete colonies or villages, we
permit them to administer their internal affairs according to their own
ideas. This means that our own appointed officials will not concern
themselves with their internal organization. In all other respects, however,
such colonists are under obligation to submit to our civil law. Yet their
wishes will be met if they themselves desire us to provide a particular
person, with a company of well-disciplined soldiers, as guardian or
overseer of their safety and defense until they have become known by the
neighboring population.

6. Every foreigner who wishes to settle in Russia may bring his
goods, of whatever description, into the country duty-free, with the one
restriction that the goods are for his own use and requirements and not for
sale. Any who bring possessions beyond those required for personal use,
and with the intention of selling them, are permitted by us to import three
hundred rubles worth of such goods duty-free per family, but only on
condition that these immigrants remain ten years in Russia. In all other
cases, customs dues will be collected both on incoming and outgoing
goods.
7. While domiciled in this country, the foreign settlers in Russia shall
not be taken against their wills for military or any other service apart from
the customary labor services. They are to be exempt even from these
services on the land until the expiration of the duty-free years granted
above. However, if anyone chooses to become a soldier and volunteers for
military service, he will receive on enlistment a bonus of thirty rubles in
addition to his regular pay in the regiment.
8. On registering at the Bureau of Guardianship or at a border town,
and after stating their intention to enter Russia as settlers, the immigrant
aliens will immediately receive journey money and free transport to their
chosen destination.
9. To any immigrant into Russia who starts a factory or enterprise for
producing goods not previously made in Russia, we grant ten years'
exemption from any kind of customs dues on the sale and export of his
goods by inland water transport or across borders.
10. For foreign capitalists who start factories and enterprises at their
own cost, we hereby grant permission to buy the serfs and peasants
necessary for such factories and other enterprises.
11. To all foreigners who have settled as a group in their own colonies
and villages, we also grant permission to arrange market days and fairs as
they deem best, without paying the smallest fee into our treasury.
7. The privileges and arrangements listed above are to be enjoyed not
only by those entering and settling in our country, but also by their

surviving children and descendants even if born in Russia; the period of
exemption to be reckoned from the date their forefathers entered Russia.
8. When the period of exemption is over, all foreign settlers in Russia
are obliged, like all our other subjects, to pay the customary dues and
taxes, which are in no way burdensome.
9. To conclude, if any such settlers, who have become our subjects,
should afterwards wish to leave our empire, we give them complete
freedom to move at any time, with this exception: that each is obliged to
pay into our treasury a portion of the profits earned in our dominions:
those who have lived here between one and five years must pay one fifth;
those here from five to ten years and more are to pay a tenth; thereafter,
each is allowed to move freely wherever he wishes.
10. In addition, if some of those desiring to settle in Russia are
motivated by concerns and interests not cited above and wish to obtain
other conditions and privileges, such aliens should apply either in person
or by writing to the Bureau of Guardianship for Foreign Colonists. This
office will present all the facts to us, and after the circumstances are
examined, each applicant may rest assured that in our love of justice we
will not hesitate to issue an exceedingly favorable resolution from the
highest quarters.

Issued at Peterhof on the twenty-second day of July in the year 1763,
the second year of our reign.
The original was signed by Her Supreme Imperial Majesty with her
own hand as follows:
(Signatura manu propria)
Printed by the Senate on July 25, 1763.
***************

Paul I's Letter of Privilege
of September 6, 1800
We by the help and grace of God
Paul I, Emperor and sole ruler of all the Russians, etc., etc.
Herewith witness to our most gracious consent to the petition of the
Mennonite settlers in the province of New Russia. According to the reports
of their overseer, their remarkable igence and high standard of conduct
could be an example to other settlers in their area and make them merit
our special attention. Therefore, through this Letter of Privilege now
granted them, we not only graciously affirm the conditions already agreed
and the rights and privileges they already possess, but in order to
encourage still further the diligence and care in agricultural work, we are
desirous to give them further privileges which are set out in the following
points.
FIRST, we affirm the freedom of religion promised to them and their
descendants, which enables them to continue without hindrance in their
own religious beliefs and church customs. We also most graciously
consent that when required by law to swear, their spoken Yes or No will be
accepted as valid in place of an oath.
SECOND, we confirm that the sixty-five dessiatines [175 acres] of
useful land granted to each family are to remain its property indisputably
and in perpetuity, while forbidding any them, under any pretext
whatsoever, to pass on, sell, or legally transfer the property or even the
smallest part of it to a stranger, without first obtaining express permission
from the authorities appointed for them.
THIRD, we permit those Mennonites already settled in Russia as well
as those intending to settle under our rule, to establish factories and to
engage in commerce and other useful occupations not only in their own
area but also in the cities of our Empire; they may also join guilds and

corporations in order to sell their products unhindered; in all this,
however, they are obliged to observe the laws pertaining to this country.
FOURTH, in accordance with property rights, we allow the
Mennonites to make free use of their land, including fishing, brewing beer,
making vinegar, and also distilling spirits for their own needs and for sale
in small quantities on the sections belonging to them.
FIFTH, we not only forbid other people to build inns and public
houses on Mennonite land, but also prohibit the selling of spirits under
government license without permission from the Mennonites.
SIXTH, we give them our most gracious assurance as Czar that any
Mennonite already settled in this country, or Mennonite planning to settle
in our Empire in future, or child or descendant of theirs, shall at all times
be exempt from compulsory military or civilian service, except at their
express desire.
SEVENTH, we release all their villages and dwellings from any kind
of obligation to billet soldiers except when commandos are passing
through, in which case everything is to be done according to the billeting
regulations. The exemption also applies to supplying compulsory transport
and forced labor for the crown. On the other hand, they are to maintain in
good order all bridges, ferries, and roads on their own land and to do their
share in providing for the guard posts according to the usual arrangements.
EIGHTH, we most graciously permit all Mennonites and their
descendants the complete freedom to use their honestly acquired property
(which does not include the land granted by the crown) according to their
own wishes and in any way they find good. Should one of them, however,
after paying off all the debts he owes to the crown, desire to emigrate from
this country taking his possessions with him, he must pay three years'
taxes on the capital he has accrued in Russia, the sum to be
conscientiously assessed by him and the village overseers. The same
procedure is to be followed with property left at death when the heirs and
relatives live in foreign countries and, under the laws of inheritance, the
inherited property should be forwarded to them. We also grant the village

community the right to follow its own customs in choosing guardians for
the property left by deceased people to children under legal age.
NINTH, we most graciously confirm the ten-year period of taxexemption already granted to the Mennonites and extend it to all
Mennonites intending to settle in the province of New Russia. However, a
recent investigation has shown that they are an impoverished state, due to
repeated poor harvests and cattle plague, and that they are also settled too
densely in the Chortitza area; in consequence, the decision has been made
to move a number of families to a different place. Therefore, in
consideration of their poverty and need, in addition to the ten years'
exemption already granted, we most graciously grant a further five years
of tax exemption for those who remain in their present place of settlement,
and a further ten years' tax exemption those directed to move. Upon the
expiration of the extended period, each family owning sixty-five
dessiatines [175 acres] is to pay fifteen kopeks annually for every
dessiatine of land, while remaining exempt from all other dues to the
crown. After the period of exemption, the advances in money must be paid
back in equal installments, over ten years, by those who are remaining in
their homes, and over twenty years by those who must move.
TENTH, to conclude this imperial letter of privilege conferred on the
Mennonites, in most gracious confirmation of their rights and privileges,
we command all our civil and military officials, likewise our legal
officers, not only to leave the said Mennonites and their descendants in
undisturbed possession of dwellings, sections of land and rights of
cultivation, as well as in the enjoyment of the most graciously granted
privileges, but still more to let them find help, support and protection in
every instance.
Issued in the city of Satschina on September 6 of the year one
thousand eight hundred after the birth of Christ, this being the fourth year
of our reign and our second year as Grand Master.
Paul.
(The original is signed by His Imperial Majesty's own hand.)

Count von Rostopschin
European Hutterian Communities in This Chronicle

***************

An Introduction to this Edition
This book is the proof, amid an impersonal and often faithless age, of
a real and living spiritual history, a history that is still evolving because it
is still being lived. It depicts a spiritual journey that is still under way, a
movement of God that still draws hearts and souls together in the mystery
of Christ, building communities of believers who single-mindedly seek
and strive after eternal glory.
This history, however, will show any reader that this glory will never
be found on this earth in perfection. Indeed, this history is written in the
blood of suffering, martyrdom, and persecution, and in the tears of
despair, human frailty, and struggle.
From their beginnings in the early 1500s, the Hutterian Brethren have
struggled, quite desperately at times, to live the life of dedicated Christian
community. It has been a harsh and sometimes tempestuous journey; many
have fallen away, and yet others have joined the fight and endured.
Division, strife, and by turns, periods of very deep unity, have long
characterized our journey to God.
These struggles continue unabated to this very day, and so this history
must, we hope, live on in God's grace, to serve as an example, an
inspiration, and a warning to those who take part in this life of sharing.
This book, The Chronicle of the Hutterian Brethren, Volume II, is an
English translation of our German Das Kleine Geschichtsbuch, which

itself is a companion volume to our older Grosse-Geschichtbuch. Both of
our chronicles have been in print in German for many years, prepared
from the original handwritten codices passed on from our forefathers, and
which still exist today in our communities. (The circa 1581 codex
containing the Grosse-Geschichtbuch resides at Bon Homme Colony,
South Dakota, with a second volume at a colony in Montana; while the
Kleine-Geschichtsbuch can be found at Sturgeon Creek Colony, Manitoba.
Other handwritten copies also exist.) But it has been only in recent years
that an effort to translate these important books into English has been
made.
Volume I of the Chronicle was published in English in 1987. With the
appearance of this volume, the greater part of Hutterian historical writing
is now available in English, so that many more may learn and draw from
it.
This volume is based largely on A. J. F. Zieglschmid's definitive
German edition of Das Kleine-Geschichtsbuch, published in 1943 by the
Carl Schurz Memorial Foundation, at the request of the Hutterian Church.
Other material not included by Zieglschmid also has been incorporated, to
give a somewhat fuller picture.
This volume consists in large part of a summary of the earlier
chronicle, followed by subsequent history, leading up to the Hutterites'
settlement in Russia in the 18th century. This was written by Johannes
Waldner, a church Elder of that time. Following this is another, later
section compiled by Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen, two Hutterian brothers,
which includes an account of the communities in Russia, followed by the
immigration of the church to North America. Added to this are other
documents and extracts by Hutterian authors, compiled by Zieglschmid
and others, giving details of this immigration and the early years in
America.
Apart from the present volume's historical merit, it is our hope that it
will continue to encourage, edify, and move Christian hearts to a life of
true community for many generations to come.

Such was the purpose of this Chronicle when it was written all these
decades and centuries ago, and so it still is now.
Because the Hutterian Brethren live on, this history is a dynamic,
thriving reflection of what we are today, a mirror in which we all may see
our very souls reflected.
It is our hope that genuine, seeking hearts may find an inspiration and
an encouragement in these pages.
Thanks to all the brothers and sisters who dedicated their labor and
efforts to bring this task to its successful conclusion.
On behalf of the Schmiedeleut Conference of the Hutterian Brethren
Church,
Signed by the Elders, in April 1998,

The Rev. Elder Jakob Kleinsasser
Crystal Spring Colony
Ste. Agathe, Manitoba
Canada ROG IYO

The Rev. Mike Wollman
Springhill Colony
Neepawa, Manitoba
Canada ROG IHO

The Rev. David Decker
Starland Colony
Gibbon, Minnesota
U.S.A. 55335

The Rev. Sam Waldner
Decker Colony
Decker, Manitoba
Canada ROM OKO

The Rev. Jakob Hofer
Valley View Colony
Swan Lake, Manitoba
Canada ROG 2SO

Schmiedeleut Conference of the Hutterian Brethren Church
Letter Patent File Number: 327265-6
***************

1536 Growth of the Brotherhood

Now because the enemy always mixes weeds among the wheat, the
Lord humbles the mighty, and nothing is so hidden that it will not be
revealed, I want to tell further what happened in the church. Each one can
see clearly from the following account how God separated the devout from
the hypocrites. This is how it began.
As reported above, Simon Schützinger and the elders had asked Jakob
Hutter to help them care for the people, so a few days later Jakob was
about to start improving certain things in the church. But Schützinger
resisted and tried to stop him. Then Jakob wished to know if he was
wanted as a shepherd or not. He felt that he could not remain silent and
fail to exercise his ministry. If he was not needed, he would move on and
serve wherever the Lord led him. So he went to Rossitz and explained the
situation to Gabriel [Ascherham], saying he did not know whether the
people wanted him or not. He said he was willing to bring the matter
before the church and do whatever the people of God asked of him.
Gabriel raised no objection but said, Do it with discernment.
While Jakob was at Rossitz, Schützinger spoke with the two servants
for temporal affairs, Leonhard Schmerbacher and Wilhelm Griesbacher.
He said he intended to continue in his ministry and not give Jakob much
chance to speak. The two brothers were not in agreement. They said he
should remain in his ministry but Jakob should serve with him. But Simon
did not want this.
When Jakob returned home from Rossitz and wished to pass on
greetings from Gabriel and his community to the church, Schützinger
forbade it. He admonished Jakob and asked him what he was trying to do.
Thus Schützinger revealed his real intentions toward Jakob.
In reply Jakob told Schützinger and the elders, including Kaspar, a
minister from Rossitz, that he wanted to know whether the church needed
him. To not fulfill his ministry was something he was not free to do, and
he would not know how to answer for it before God.
Simon answered that through the drawing of lots God had entrusted
this people to him and made him their shepherd, and therefore he intended
to continue in this ministry. If Jakob had anything to say, he should do so

briefly, for he could not allow him to speak very long. Even though the
elders who were present opposed Simon, he insisted on being the one to
teach the people.
The elders, including Kaspar from Rossitz, said they should both care
for the people together, but still Simon wanted to be the only shepherd.
The elders wished to gather the church the very next day but had to
postpone the meeting until Sunday, because a number of brothers were
away. Meanwhile Simon sent to Rossitz for Gabriel, who set out
immediately but stopped in at Philip's community. Simon Schützinger
joined them and complained to Gabriel and Philip that Jakob was pushing
to be a shepherd over the church. So they sent for Jakob, who came
without knowing what they wanted. Later in the night, Kaspar from
Rossitz, Leonhard Schmerbacher, and Wilhelm Griesbacher were also
called.
When they arrived, Gabriel accused Jakob of putting himself above
Simon Schützinger as shepherd. Jakob said that it was not so; he only
wished to serve the church. I have been sent here after earnest prayer to
God. The people have been entrusted to me as well as to Schützinger. All I
ask is to be able to continue to serve the brethren.
Philip retorted, If that is what you want, Jakob, then you are the most
wicked devil who has ever come into this country.
But Jakob remained firm, adding, How would you feel if you had
gone on a journey, entrusting the people to someone else, and then had to
stand back when you returned home?
After much talking, Philip said his feeling was that Jakob and Simon
should work together, faithfully caring for the people, Just as Blasi and I
do.
When he asked Jakob what he thought of that, Jakob replied, I want
nothing more than to serve with Schützinger. May God be praised.

Then Gabriel said, No, I don't see it that way. I command you, Simon,
to continue in your office of shepherd to this people. If you now were to
lose courage for your ministry and allow it to be weakened because Jakob
is more gifted and a better speaker than you, God would punish you. The
same would happen to you as happened to me with the Swiss Brethren.
<Font Color=Red>(See the story of the thorn bush, Judges 9.)</Font>
Simon quickly replied, Yes, yes, my brother. Praise the Lord! It is
true, my brother Gabriel, it is true!
Leonhard Schmerbacher objected, But Philip said first that both
should care for the people together, and now Gabriel says something quite
different.
Philip replied, I feel exactly like Gabriel. Even though what I said
may have sounded otherwise, that is what I meant in my heart. Much
talking followed which does not need to be recorded here.
Jakob again desired to hear what the church felt about him. This they
could not refuse, but they told him to be careful of what he said and not to
overdo it.
On the following Sunday, Jakob spoke to the gathered church,
explaining the reason for his coming and that for a time he had had to stop
the work God had entrusted to him. With restraint he told about his talks
with the elders and with Simon, Gabriel, and Philip.
Then Simon spoke, reminding the people of his election and saying
that he was going to stand by it. Gabriel supported him in a long speech,
describing how Simon originally had been chosen by lot. However, if they
were going to insult him and preferred Jakob because he was a better
speaker, or if they placed Simon and Jakob in the position together, then
he, Gabriel, would have no part in it and would go back by the road he had
come. He pointed out that in Jerusalem there was only one shepherd,
namely James. Here Jakob contradicted him.
Nothing could stop Gabriel. He warned the people, using the terrible
example of Korah: if they looked down on Simon's simplicity and

preferred Jakob's fine speaking, God would punish them as he did Korah
and his company. He warned the people to guard against making an idol of
Jakob, who to him seemed proud and arrogant. After many words, he
declared that Jakob did not have the gifts to serve the people as a
shepherd, but only as an apostle.
The church was then asked to make a decision. Two or three spoke to
the effect that Simon should continue in his position and Jakob should
assist him. Peter Hueter said that to him neither seemed higher or lower,
greater or smaller; one seemed to him as good as the other. Schützinger cut
him short, calling him a stupid man - he had thought him a great deal
wiser. Gabriel spoke against him in the same way, but with little
justification. Then Leonhard Schmerbacher declared that he was unable to
put one minister before the other, for the people had been entrusted to one
as much as to the other, yet for the sake of peace, love, and unity, Jakob
should give the honor and precedence to Simon. Everybody said, Yes, yes.
However, one brother added that although he had nothing against the
decision, Simon would do well enough even without having Jakob there.
Gabriel asked Jakob if he would accept the decision to give
Schützinger precedence. Jakob replied that he wanted first to consider it
before God, taking counsel with the elders and ministers. Gabriel retorted,
I have nothing more to say to you; I will be on my way.
The brotherhood separated in great anguish of heart. Some went to
comfort Jakob, who was deeply distressed; others who saw this presumed
that he wanted to win the people over and take them to a separate place.
One said this, another that. In short, everyone was overcome with grief.
On the following Tuesday, the brotherhood was again called together.
Jakob announced to the church that he had taken counsel with God and
talked with the elders, and he could only acknowledge that God, in his
providence, had appointed him and sent him to this people. But the
brothers did not understand me, he added, so there is nothing to be done.
For the sake of love, peace, and unity, I will accept the decision of the
church, but not because it is just.

Gabriel retorted, You say we did not understand you - but we speak
German, too. There was no need for you to say anything at all. The
brotherhood, though very distressed, kept up their spirits and trusted that
with God's leading everything would work out for the best.
Two weeks later, the Lord struck Simon Schützinger down with
sickness, and he lay seriously ill in bed. So Jakob Hutter proclaimed the
Word of the Lord to the church, according to the grace he had been given.
The next Sunday, September 28, at the repeated request of the elders,
he held a meeting in which he admonished and taught in the power of God,
exhorting the people to the true community of Jesus Christ. At that point
several began again to mutter against Jakob.
***************

APPENDIX
The following historical sketch, a footnote by Zieglschmid, may help
to give a framework for this extended period, about which the chronicle
repeats year after year, in effect: Oppression and hardships caused by
soldiers. It may also supply some background for the turmoil and
persecution of vast segments of the population in Moravia and Hungary, in
large part occasioned by the almost constant fighting in that part of the
world in the 16th and 17th centuries, including the religious wars between
Catholics and Protestants.
In 1526, the Turkish Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent (1520-1566)
occupied Buda (on the west bank of the Danube, until 1872 an independent
town, now part of Budapest) for the first time and made Hungary into a
vassal state under the Transylvanian prince Johann Zapolya. In 1538, after
twelve years of war, the secret pact of Grosswardein (Oradea or
Nágyvarad) secured him the southern part of Hungary. In 1541 he started a
new war, conquering Hungary as far west as Buda, Esztergom, and
Stuhlweissenberg (Szekesfehervar), and making this part of the country a
Turkish province. (Transylvania and the lands east of the Tisza River had

come into the possession of Zapolya's widow and son after Zapolya's death
in 1540.) The Hapsburg territories included western and northern Hungary
and a small part of Croatia. Thus the Kingdom of Hungary was divided
into three parts, a division that gave rise to endless conflicts and led to an
almost permanent state of war. To these Turkish wars was added the unrest
inside Hungary due to the insubordination of the nobles and the conditions
within the churches.
Ferdinand I (king of Bohemia and Hungary after 1526, and Holy
Roman Emperor, 1556-1564) was a sworn enemy of all Protestants,
particularly of the Hutterites. In Hungary, the nationalist party had placed
Johann Zapolya on the throne as rival king, while Sultan Suleiman the
Magnificent had led his troops to the outskirts of Vienna in 1529 and to the
Austrian border in 1532 and 1541. It was after 1551 (the year Ferdinand I
opened a Jesuit college in Vienna in the interest of the CounterReformation), that the war over Transylvania began, which lasted until
1562. Transylvania, however, remained in Turkish hands.
Under the mild rule of Maximilian II (1564-1576), Ferdinand I's
successor, the Reformation was allowed to spread unhindered. Under
Maximilian's successor, Rudolf II (15761612), however, the persecution of
Protestants set in again. In October 1604, after Rudolf II had added to the
21 constitutional clauses of the Provincial Diet a 22nd clause seriously
threatening the religious freedom of Hungarian Protestants, Stephen
Bocskay (1556-1606) made common cause with Bethlen Gabor and other
Hungarians to stir up a successful rebellion in Hungary. The imperial
troops had to withdraw. In 1605 Sultan Ahmed I (1603-1617) confirmed
Stephen Bocskay as Prince of Transylvania, who concluded a peace treaty
with the emperor in Vienna on June 23, 1606. The 22nd clause of 1604 was
rescinded, and Protestants were granted freedom of religion, provided it
was without detriment to the Roman Catholic Church. Simultaneously
Ahmed I concluded the unfavorable peace of Sitvatbrok with the emperor
in order to free his hands to deal with Persia.
Emperors Ferdinand 11 (1619-1637) and Ferdinand III (1637-1657),
intent on re-catholicizing Hungary, were supported with fanatical zeal by
the archbishop of Esztergom, Peter Pazmany (1570-1637). The Protestants

found protectors in the princes of Transylvania, Bethlen Gabor (d. 1629)
and George Rákóczi I (1593-1648). The latter concluded a peace with
Emperor Ferdinand III on December 16, 1645, at Linz, which was meant to
insure religious and political freedom in Hungary. Under Emperor Leopold
I (1658-1705), however, there was renewed suppression, leading to a
major conspiracy in 1667 among the nobility, headed by Wesselenyi,
Zrinyi, Nadasdy, and others.
***************

1767 The Flight from Transylvania into Wallachia
When morning came, the journey was begun in the name of God.
Those shut up in the churchyard left their prison without hindrance. It
seemed as if the ungodly people had no power to prevent them. The
Alwinz brothers and sisters and their children were all there, too, except
for sister Anna Wipf, who was in the penitentiary with the other prisoners
and had to stay behind while her children traveled on. They made all the
use they could of their own wagons. The community at Kreuz had one
wagon with two pair of oxen and the brothers from Stein had one wagon
with two pair of horses. The most necessary things were loaded, and after
we had eaten a little food we began our journey.
This departure was a pitiable sight: the brothers and sisters and the
older boys and girls of fourteen and fifteen years, each with staff in hand
and bundle on back, some with a small child on top of the bundle. The
four- and five-year-old children had to go on foot. So we set out in the
name of God, leaving our well-built houses and much of our household
goods behind, unsold. The Kreuz officials, citizens, and farmers watched
us go. On the one hand, they were happy to be rid of us; on the other, they
were afraid of the authorities in Hermannstadt because they were letting us
escape out of our churchyard prison in broad daylight. But no one called a
halt, for the believers' road was prepared by God.

We left Kreuz on October 3, 1767, at ten o'clock in the morning. The
church community of the Lord had been established in Kreuz for six years,
and its members had lived in the simplicity of Christ, in the unity of the
Holy Spirit, with the same order and customs as in the first apostolic
church, practicing community of temporal goods and separation from the
world as far as was possible. They used the ban and exclusion for the
disobedient and for wrongdoers; they also educated their children rightly.
About sixty-seven of us started out from Kreuz, passed Dodendorf,
and reached the boundary of the third village, which was Schweiz. Just
before sunset we made our camp in a valley. We came to prayer together,
praising and thanking God that we had been enabled to leave, and asking
him in his grace and mercy to remain with us on this journey. After a rest
and a bite to eat, we set out again at dusk; silently, we passed through the
market town of Reps, and came to the Olt River. We were not allowed to
cross because we had no permits; so we had to follow the river upstream to
a wood at a place called Fratum. Here we made our camp just before
daybreak and remained for the whole day. Two brothers went back in the
horse-drawn wagon to fetch the brothers and sisters still at Stein. *

Table of Contents
Excerpts and Summary of our Church Chronicle
Names of Elders
Preface to the Reader
Explanatory Note
Introduction
Beginning of our Church History
1519 Beginning of the Church in Switzerland, Germany, and Moravia
1526 God's Word Proclaimed
1526 King Ferdinand kills many believers
1527-1531 List of those executed in Germany for the sake of their
Faith
1529 Order for a Christian life drawn up at that time
1528 Jakob Wiedemann and followers separated from sword bearers
1528 Community of Goods began
1529 Purification of the Church community
1530 Reublin preaches without authority
1530 The Second Purification
1531 Bohemian David and Georg Zaunring excluded
1532 Profane soldiers mistreat the faithful
1533 Jacob Hutter returns from Tirol
1533 Account of the split between the three communities
1533 Simon Schützinger's deception
1533 The Third Purification
1533 Severe persecution in Tirol
1534 Jan van Leyden's kingdom of Münsterites
1535 Decision to cease working for priests
1535 Community driven from Auspitz
1536 Jakob Hutter arrested
1537 Georg Fasser couldn't read, but preached Gospel
1538 Onophrius Griesinger, Leonhard Lochmaier executed
1539 Brothers sent out on the Lord's Work
1539 Troubles at Steinebrunn
1540 Falkeinstein Prisoners

1541 Peter Riedemann writes Confession of Faith during
imprisonment
1542 Hans Amon dies, Lanzenstiel appointed Elder
Table of Martyrs
1542 Martyrs tortures
1543 Concerning the incarnation of Christ
1544 Hans Mändel & Jörg Liebich imprisoned & released
1545 Bärtel Riedmair with group of 300 unite with the Church
1546 Imprisoned Brothers escaped because of fire
1547 More communities established
1547 Brotherhood was expelled from Hungary & Moravia
1548 None were spared; neither old, nor sick, nor children
1548 If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you
1548 Faithful were mocked by all
1550 All Anabaptists given notice to leave country
1550 Foxes have holes, birds have nests, but believers had no place
1551 The faithful were at everyone's mercy
1551 After years of distress, life in community was begun anew
1550 Wolf Sailer passed away
1553 New Communities established at Schadowitz and at Gobschitz,
1555 Hans Mändel's and Michael Veldthaler's encounter with
Taufkircher
1555 Attempts to capture Hans Mändel
1555 The plight of some of the brothers' children
1555 Michael Veldthaler's desperate escape
1556 Peter Ridemann passed away
1557 Hans Kräl's Imprisonment and release
1558 Bastel Binder denies the truth & dies unable to repent
1559 Wolf Mair and Wolf Huber executed at Salzburg
1560 Klaus Felbinger's and Hans Leutner's undismayed execution
1560 Hans Mändel forewarned of suffering in dungeon
1564 Rebellious members excluded & repented
1565 Leonhart Lanzenstiel passed away/Church entrusted to Peter
Walpot
1566 Bohemian chancellor drowned by breaking bridge
1567 Brothers severely tortured
1568 Hans Arbeiter's imprisonment and release

1569 God graciously provided for his people in time of famine
1569 God prevents harm from coming upon communities
1569 Description of the community and manner of its inner and outer
life
Reliable workers, but hated by all
1570 Several brothers sent out on mission
1571 Wolf Binder, Hans Missel were executed
1573 Kasper Braitmichel first writer of the chronicle passed away
1574 Hans Plattner executed and burned
1576 Ott Niederlander's false ideas
1576 Brothers released, Paul Glock in time for daughter's marriage
1577 Comet
1578 Peter Walpot fell asleep in the Lord
1578 Hans Kräl appointed elder
1578 Two Brothers betrayed, tortured but escaped
1579 Jesuits came to Nikolsburg
1580 Severe epidemic hit German lands
1581 Refusal to help at a wedding
1582 Heinrich Sommer and Jakob Mändel drowned
1583 Hans Kräl passed away
1583 Klaus Braidl appointed elder
1584 Taxes were abated by the Diet at Olmütz
1585 Four brothers were imprisoned and executed
1586 Several hundred Swiss people came to the church
1587 Brother Michael Fischer executed
1588 Community at VelkÈ Lev·re was begun
1589 Forced to leave Paradtitz because of war taxes
1590 More conflicts over war taxes
1590 Letter to the Provincial Diet about yearly taxes
1590 12 gulden tax imposed on us
1591 Expulsion from Schenkof
1592 Thoman Haan captured & executed
1593 Turkish War begins in Croatia
1605 Short description of distress brought by this terrible war
1605 Brief description of terrifying and heartrending times
1606 Elder's decision to ransom captives
1606 Treaty made with Hungarian rebels

1607 Comet
1608 God's intervention of soldiers harassing the Church community
1611 Klaus Braidl's last words and passing
1613 Move back to Sabatisch
1618 Development of the terrible war
1619 Beginnings of the terrible war
A brief summary describing the damage & the great distress
1619 Sebastian Dietrich fell asleep/Ulrich Jaussling appointed Elder
1620 The terrible war continued to spread
1621 More communities plundered
1621 Short accounts of the terrible events of the war
1621 Ulrich Jaussling passed away/Elder Rudolf Hirzel's treachery
1622 Valentin Winter entrusted with the care of the Church
1621 Peter Kaufman & followers excluded; false prophecy
1622 Hardships caused by war
1622 Believers no longer tolerated in Moravia
1622 Mandate sent to the brothers by the Cardinal
1622 Persecution intestified
1622 Move to Transylvania
1623 Intense suffering in Hungary because of war
1624 Hutterites in Moravia given two weeks to leave
1625 Cardinal attempts to drive believers out of Hungary
1626 General Albrecht enters Hungary with large army
1627 Fire at Tschaskowitz
1628 Cardinal issued another severe decree
1629 Strange affair at VelkÈ Lev·re concerning prayer
1630 Disastrous flood at Sabatisch
1631 Valentin Winter passed away/Heinrich Hartmann appointed
elder
1632 Protzka plundered
1633 Isaak Baumann incident
1633 Show of resistance at Sabatisch
1633 Terrible verdict handed down by the jurors
1633 Suffering brought upon the imprisoned by Lord Franz NagyMichaly
1633 Statement presented to the brotherhood at VelkÈ Lev·re
1636 Disastrous fire at Sabatisch

1637 Dry summer, followed by famine
1639 Heinrich Hartmann passed away/Andreas Ehrenpreis made
Elder
1640 Contribution toward building up fortifications as Neuhäusel
1642 Great damage by Swedish Field Marshall
1643 Fire at Sabatisch again
1645 Benjamin Kengel's false ideas
Prince Rakoczi and his army surround Sabatisch
1647 Fifteen-pound hailstones fell near Tobitschau
1650 Expelled again from Moravia
1652 Comet
1654 Daniel Zwicker a doctor from Prussia joined the church
community
1655 Deaths from Pestilence
1661 Comet/German Soldiers enter Hungary
1662 Crops ruined by sudden cold spell in May
1662 Andreas Ehrenpreis last words & parting/Johannes Rücker Elder
1663 Signs that preceded the war with the Turks & Tartars
1663 The terrible war with the Turks & Tartars
1664 Raider stole what little the Turks had left behind
1665 Brothers sent to the Mennonites for alms/Another comet
1665 Letter of thanks to the Mennonites
1621 Account of the church at Alwinz
1660 Account of the church in Alwinz
Servants of the Word who led the Church at Alwinz,
To the Reader
List of servants of the Word
1622 Deterioration of the Church in Hungary
1650s Examples from old teachings
1650s Examples from old teachings/laziness
1650s Examples from old teachings/gossip
1650s Examples from old teachings/witness given by sisters
1643 Points brought to the attention of the Church
1650s Examples from old teachings/faithlessness
Lost records
1688 End of community of goods/probable date & cause
1725 How infant baptism was introduced at VelkÈ Lev·re

1725 How infant baptism began at Sabatisch
1666 Georg Geiss faithless shepherd steal goods and forsakes
community
1706 How community of goods came to an end
1738 Alwinz community struck by plague
1734 God no longer wished this people to call themselves by this
name
1759 Final persecution began
1759 Books confiscated
1760 Persecution continues
1761 Total collapse of the Sabatisch & VelkÈ Lev·re church
1761 Merciless beatings caused brothers to renounce faith
1762 Request for pass to leave country refused
1763 Jesuit Delphini arrives at community/Joseph Kuhr's refusal to
attend his sermon
1764 Joseph Kuhrs' firm stand
1764 Delphini's advance on the community
1764 Church split into three groups
1765 Brothers & Sisters returned to Alwinz
1766 Most of the believers were forced to become unfaithful
1766 Kreuz community persecuted
1767 Account of what happened to whoever was left
1752-1802 PART 3 Account of the Carinthian Hutterites
1752 Account of How and Where Our Church Began
1752 Roots of the Carinthian Hutterites
1752 Open persecution against all Protestants
1752 List of those who began our Church community
1755 Exiled to Transylvania rather than accept Roman Catholicism
1755 Lutherans did not follow Gospel truth
1755 Unite with the Hutterian Brethren
1755 Brothers defend decision to join the Hutterian Brethren
1756 Carinthian brothers persecuted
1757 Attempt to separate the brothers
1762 Carinthians establish community
1765 Disunity/reunited in an unexpected way
1763 Lutherans attempt to convert brothers
1767 Jesuit sent to convert the community

1767 Cruelly mistreated and banished
1767 The scattered people gathered again
1767 Joseph Kuhr and Johannes Stahl's journey back to the
community
1767 Delphini's attempt to take the community's children
1767 Preparations for the secret flight
1767 Orders given to prevent the move from Stein
1767 The difficult journey to Kronstadt and over the mountains
1767 Searching for a suitable place to build
1767 Dugouts built for houses
1768 Work was established/Spinning, Weaving and Pottery
1768 Severe sickness/Start of Russian-Turkish war
1768 Incident over a wooden cross
1769 A new place to settle
1769 Russians conquer the Turks/robbed people
1769 Robbers treat community with inhuman cruelty-took everything
1769 Johannes Waldner's own experience of the inhuman treatment
1769 Another gang of thieves/continual molest
1770 Request for safe-conduct/plans to leave Wallachia
1770 The war continued
1770 Turks attack the community/escape from slavery
1770 Move from Wallachia to Russian
1770 Quarantined at Khotin
1770 Privileges granted to the colonists
1770 The brothers escorted and provided for
1771 What happened to those imprisoned in Transylvania
1772 Prisoners release
1771 Beginning of community at Vishenka
1773 Disputes started by Mathies Hofer
1768 Mathies Hofer's letter from Hermannstadt
1768 Martin Glanzer letter to the church community
1773 Many troubled by Mathies Hofer's letter
1773 Strange ideas about eating
1773 Brotherhood brought into confusion
1773 Subject carefully searched through forefather's writings
1773 The long disputes were settled
1773 Why quarrels must be recounted

1773 Mathies Hofer objected to singing while at work
1773 Community's outward circumstances improved
1779 Hans Kleinsasser passed away/Joseph Kuhr made Elder
1780 Mathies Hofer's disagreement over prayers/excluded
1781 Gerhard Wiebe's letter to the Community
1786 Mathies passed away/worship changed
1781 First mission journey from Vishenka
1782 Second mission journey from Vishenka
1782 Jakob Walter's letter to the Church
1782 Brothers not tolerated/many turned Catholic
1782 The Third Journey
1782 The two brothers brought into great difficulties by a baker
1783 Returned with several Mennonites to the church
1783 The Fourth Journey
1784 The Fifth Journey
1784 List of all who came from Sabatisch and VelkÈ Lev·re to Russia
1784 Account of subsequent events
1784 Plea for descendants to remember forefathers
1784 Johannes Hofer deserted the Church
1784 Christian Wurtz also fell away
1783 New tax imposed on the country & community
1786 Jakob Walter's tragic drowning/famine
1787 Negotiations about war taxes
1787 New contract made
1788 Many brothers were lost through sickness
1793 Two brothers sent to Sabatisch/nothing achieved
1794 Elder Joseph Kuhr fell asleep/Johannes Waldner entrusted with
church
1795 Second census
1795 Brothers traveled to Sabatisch/Lemberg Mennonites unhappy
outcome
1795 Count Rumiantsev dies/freedom loss feared
1796 More attempts for freedom of recruitment
1796 Favor found in new czar
1801 Decree of the Governing Senate
1801 Brothers thankful for being saved from serfdom
1802 The Move from Vishenka

1783 Report by Heinrich Donner on Vishenka
1780 Account of the Community
1802-1842 In Radicheva
Johann Wigand; Authentic Account of the Hutterian brothers in the
Ukraine
1808 Letter from Peter Hofer and Peter Janzen to the Moravian
Brethren
1802 Official report on the Hutterites
1802-1811 Deaths through the years
1818 Community split
1818 Fire destroyed community/community of goods abandoned
1824 Official report of the deterioration of Radicheva
1818 Agreement
1842 Request to leave Radicheva
1842 Johann Cornies assistance
1842 The founding of Huttertal
1843 Huttertal and Johann Cornies
1843 Dispute over arranged marriages
1843 Official report on reasons for our move to southern Russia
1847 Freiherr von Haxthausen report on Huttertal
1846 Attempt to re-establish community of goods
Petition of 1848
1848 Reasons for the split in Huttertal
Petition of 1852 appeal for suitable land
1852 Fragment of letter on community of goods
1856 Community of goods attempted at Kutcheva
1858 Community of goods re-established
1860 Darius Walter start second bruderhof
1864 Third group attempts community of goods
1868 Community dissolved
1870 Generous privileges came to end
1873 Diary: A journey to Petersburg
1873 Diary continued/Very little hope
1873 Hofers diary continues/petition translated
1873 Hofer's Diary continued/waiting for the Czar
1873 Hofer's Diary continued/unable to meet with Czar
1873 Brothers search for a new place to live

1873 Excerpts from Paul Tschetter's Journal
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/on board
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/in America
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/with the Mennonites
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Search for Land
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Canada
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Grand Forks and Minnesota
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/Nebraska
1873 Paul Tschetter's Journal/meet with President
1873 Petition presented to the President of the US
1873 Reply to the Petition
1874 Journey to America
1874 In America
1874 Settling in Bon Homme
1875 Letter from Bon Homme to Wolf Creek
1876 Attempt to unite communities
1876 Second mission journey to Russia
1885 Letter from Michel Waldner to community at Bon Homme
1651-1873 CHURCH ORDINANCES OF THE HUTTERIAN
BRETHREN
Manifesto of July 22, 1763
Paul I's Letter of Privilege
An Introduction to this Edition
1536 Growth of the Brotherhood
APPENDIX
1767 The Flight from Transylvania into Wallachia

